[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

This article was downloaded by: [The University of Manchester Library]

On: 23 January 2015, At: 22:56

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered

office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

South European Society and Politics

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:

http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fses20

Immigration Politics Italian Style: The Paradoxical Behaviour of Mainstream and Populist Parties

Ted Perlmutter Published online: 19 Nov 2007.

To cite this article: Ted Perlmutter (1996) Immigration Politics Italian Style: The Paradoxical Behaviour of Mainstream and Populist Parties, South European Society and Politics, 1:2, 229-252, DOI: 10.1080/13608749608539473

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13608749608539473

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 229

Immigration Politics Italian Style: The Paradoxical Behaviour of Mainstream and Populist Parties

TED PERLMUTTER

The politics surrounding Italy's first comprehensive immigration legislation (1990) and its emergence in the subsequent election campaign contradict our traditional understanding of how political parties respond to immigration. The Italian Republican Party, a small, liberal, governing party, waged a highly polemical campaign against the Law, whereas the Northern League, a party known for its right-wing tendencies, chose not to mobilize. By measuring the Italian experience against traditional theory, this article demonstrates the importance of considering party system fragmentation and differences between populist and extremeright parties in explaining the likelihood that parties will exploit the issue.

When Italy passed its first effort at comprehensive immigration legislation in 1990, political parties in western Europe and the United States already had 25 years of experience in the difficult business of managing immigration as a policy and an electoral issue. 1 Strategies had been developed to keep immigration from appearing too prominently on the political agenda. Only extremist parties had made a practice of mobilizing around this issue.

In 1990, immigration became a very public issue in Italy both in policy debates and an election campaign in ways that were at odds with the experiences of these other countries. In the centre, one governing party sought to take advantage of proposing immigration legislation, while another put up furious opposition. On the fringe of the party system, the Northern League, a party categorized by many analysts at the time as on the extreme Right, opposed the law far less vigorously than anticipated. These parties' behaviour contradicted social science convention as well as political experience in other advanced industrial societies.

Conventional wisdom holds that mainstream politicians in western

South European Society & Politics, Vol.1, No.2 (Autumn 1996) pp.229-252 PUBLISHED BY FRANK CASS, LONDON

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 230

230

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

Europe and America seek to arrive at consensual policy solutions and to prevent immigration from becoming an electoral issue (Hammar 1985; Freeman 1995; Perlmutter 1996). Taking an explicit partisan stand on the issue is costly because it raises issues of labour market needs and cultural nationalism in ways that risk antagonizing important constituencies in both liberal and conservative parties (Hollifield 1992; Tichenor 1994). Furthermore, an explicit politicization risks setting in motion racist tensions from which only extremist parties would benefit (Katznelson 1976; Freeman 1979).

The following chart indicates how the political science literature has described the stands political parties have taken on immigration issues. The horizontal axis concerns the party's location on a Left-Right policy scale. The vertical axis concerns the party's relation to the political system. The outcomes reveal the content of the parties' policy preferences and the forums in which the issues should be debated. The Left-Right dimension influences the degree of policy expansiveness or restriction. The pro- and anti-system variables influence the forums in which debates will be articulated, that is, the parties' preferences for publicizing the process of policy articulation and electoral mobilization. 2 Closed preferences imply constructing the policy out of the public eye, in parliamentary committee and through administrative channels, and keeping it out of electoral politics. Public preferences imply a willingness to mobilize public opinion during the policy formulation process and to use the issue in electoral campaigns. Pro-system parties prefer to work out private solutions, both in the electoral and in the policy arena. Conversely, only anti-system parties prefer public solutions.

These two dimensions are entirely independent. Parties that represent the centre of the electorate are less likely to be anti-system than those that draw from the left or right extremes and less likely to stake out extreme policy positions on immigration. But, this framework has been designed so as to include the possibility that parties drawing from the centre can also be anti-system. This 'radicalism of the centre', it shall be argued, is necessary to explain the location of populist parties.

The policy discussions both to initiate and to discontinue mass immigration in Germany and France in the 1960s and 1970s were carried out very much out of the public eye. In Britain, during the original debates over the legislation, a consensus was developed by the Labour and Conservative parties not to exploit the issue electorally. Even the highly partisan debates over refugees that dominated the German political agenda in the early 1990s can be seen as the breakdown of the mechanisms constructed in the 1980s to keep immigration from becoming an electoral issue (Perlmutter 1995a). Although immigration had often been debated in legislative arenas in the United States in the 1980s, it was done as discreetly as possible, virtually never entering into electoral discussion.

[DOCLING_PAGE 4]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 231

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

231

FIGURE 1 PARTY POSITIONS' EFFECT ON IMMIGRATION POLICY

Policy Location on General Policy Scale

[DOCLING_TABLE rows=3 columns=3]
|  | Left | Right |
| Pro-System Relation to System | Expansive Policy Closed Forum | Restrictive Policy Closed Forum |
| Anti-System | Expansive Policy Public Forum | Restrictive Policy Public Forum |
[/DOCLING_TABLE]

The Italian experience runs contrary to both the expectations of this framework and European experience. T wo small mainstream parties the Socialist (PSI) and the Republican (PRI) - sought to exploit the issue; whereas the Northern League ( Lega Nord ), which at the time was classified as extremist, did not exploit it as much as anticipated. These experiences raise two questions, the first regarding the extent to which the political system affects the likelihood of the issue being placed on the political agenda. It will be argued that in fragmented, multi-party systems, minor parties will be more likely to mobilize. The second regards the accuracy of classifying the Lega as a party of the extreme or anti-system Right. By analyzing the development of the Lega 's politics on race and immigration, this article will show that these positions were not as constitutive of Lega politics as had originally been assumed. In explaining the changes in its position, this article contends that populism is the most appropriate category for discussing the Lega . It will go on to argue that the most sustained effort to apply this category to Italy and Europe, the work of Hans-Georg Betz, errs by subsuming populism under a right-wing rubric.

In showing how political parties confront immigration, this article will draw extensively on a pair of media studies, one focusing on the mainstream parties and the other on the Lega (ISPES 1990; Costantini 1994). These studies provide unusually detailed evidence regarding the parties' willingness to publicly discuss immigration and the ways in which they framed this issue. Analyzing how parties framed the issue not only contributes to our understanding of how parties could take positions that appeared to contradict their more general ideological stances but also indicates the perils of using ideological pronouncements to classify them within larger families of parties.

[DOCLING_PAGE 5]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 232

232

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

THE CONTORTED POLITICS OF IMMIGRATION: POLICY AND ELECTORAL CONFLICT WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT

In what has come to be known as the First Republic, the Italian party system was characterized by a high degree of political fragmentation. In the 1980s and early 1990s, when the first immigration legislation was passed, Italy was governed by five party ( pentapartito ) coalitions dominated by the Christian Democrats (DC). The Christian Democratic Party was a highly factionalized mass party, which had a substantial working class constituency in addition to the traditional Catholic base. With its solid bedrock of a third of the electorate, the DC had participated in every governing coalition since the origins of the Italian Republic after the fall of fascism, but was declining in support throughout the 1980s.

Of the four minor parties in the alliance, the Republican (PRI) and particularly the Socialist Party (PSI) were the most visible and powerful. Both these parties were able to place their leaders in the prime minister's office for a time during this period, interrupting the Christian Democratic hegemony over the position. As the 1980s progressed, the Socialist Party, under Bettino Craxi's leadership, took on an increasingly central role, at the expense of the PRI. By the late 1980s, it was trying to increase its vote up to 15 per cent and Craxi had constructed close relations with the more conservative Christian Democrats that marginalized other members of the coalition. The PSI and the PRI were also the parties that would take the most outspoken stands on the immigration debates. These parties, which both positioned themselves to the left of the DC, occupied similar electoral terrain and sought to mobilize similar constituencies among newly emergent professional and managerial classes. Competition made for tense and combative relations between these members of the government (Pridham 1988: 168, 327).

The system of governing coalitions was premised on the exclusion from national government of the Communist Party, even though it represented a substantial part of the nation's working class and received between 1/4 and 1/3 of the vote. This pattern of non-alternation made for fragile, litigious governments. It lowered the costs of constant government crisis and succession, as there would be relatively little change from one government to the next. It also meant that small increases in votes had substantial political impacts. For example, the PRI's move from 3 to 5 per cent in the 1983 national elections substantially increased its bargaining power within the coalition (Pridham 1988: 329). The incentives for parties to seek to make a name for themselves on specific issues and the difficulties of such unwieldy coalitions in making coherent policy were the most prominent results of such a political system (Pasquino 1987; Lange and Regini 1989).

[DOCLING_PAGE 6]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 233

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

233

By 1980, Italy had reversed its posture from a country of emigration to one of immigration. Even by the end of the decade, Italy had relatively few immigrants in comparison with other European countries. Estimates of total immigration, legal and illegal, varied between 750,000 to 1,250,000, approximately 2 per cent of Italy's population. The most striking aspect is the diversity of immigrants. They came from a wide range of African, Asian, eastern European and South American countries. An analysis of the top ten countries of immigration in 1992 shows, in descending order, the countries to include Morocco, United States, Tunisia, Former Republic of Yugoslavia, Philippines, Germany, Albania, Great Britain, Senegal and France. Even these ten groups represented less than half of the total number of immigrants in the country (Data from Caritas 1993: 99). In the 1980s, public opinion slowly became aware of the increasing immigration. The presence of immigrants was generally ignored by the media: not until 1989 would this 'long latency' give rise to an 'extraordinary increase' in coverage (Marletti 1991: 63).

Immigrants entering Italy in the late 1980s confronted a legal system that had only recently and inadequately regulated their entry. Before 1986, there was no comprehensive regulation regarding work, a lacuna that meant that the rules governing entry dated back to the fascist decrees of 18 June 1931 (n. 773) and 6 May 1940. These laws were concerned primarily with public order, emphasizing the state's interest in knowing where foreigners were at all times. The 1986 legislation regulated the entry of workers seeking employment and provided amnesty for immigrants who could prove they had a job. Despite three successive decrees that extended the deadline until 30 September 1988, the amnesties did not encourage many immigrants to legalize their status. In addition, the law did not cover those who were self-employed, a category that encompassed a growing number of immigrants. Increased awareness of the limited coverage and failures of the earlier laws meant that by the late 1980s there was an obvious need for new legislation (Adinolfi 1992: 11-21).

The catalyzing event was the killing of Jerry Esslan Masslo, a black South African political refugee employed as an agricultural labourer in Villa Laterno, a small southern town. Although the motive was apparently robbery, the murder crystallized an Italian unease that they as a people might be more racist than they had imagined. In the words of Carlo Marletti, a media sociologist, Masslo's killing was one of those 'critical events' that transformed public attention towards immigration (Marletti 1991: 69).

[DOCLING_PAGE 7]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 234

234

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

In response to this killing and other incidents of anti-immigrant violence, the unions called for an anti-racist march in Rome. Supported by a broad range of religious groups and voluntary associations as well as organized labour, the march drew 200,000 people. Contrary to trends in the rest of western Europe, public opinion was growing increasingly favourable to immigrants. Whereas in 1987, 28 per cent of Italians polled said that they saw only disadvantages to immigration, by 1989 that number had shrunk to 23 per cent (Doxa 1991: 113).

Riding this wave of public sympathy and concern, Claudio Martelli, a Socialist leader whose stature in the party was only exceeded by Party Secretary Bettino Craxi, proposed new immigration legislation. Martelli was at this time the vice-president of the Council of Ministers, the second highest post in the government. Although there were numerous ministries involved in the development of policy, he would be the person with sufficient political and bureaucratic authority to ensure that it would be approved by the Council of Ministers and proposed as legislation (Veugelers 1994).

Within the government, these proposals met with widespread although not unanimous support. Most political actors did not fear labour market competition, the reason most often cited for restrictive policies. As in the classic dual labour market hypothesis, immigrants were seen as taking jobs that Italians did not want. This position was accepted by political actors who in other countries advocated closure. Most prominently, the unions assumed a highly open position, largely based on these assumptions. 3 Second, doubt was widespread as to whether Italy could close its borders. The country's 8,000 miles of coastline and the proximity to Albania and T unisia made the task seem insurmountable. Third, the aspiration to enter the Schengen accords, often mentioned as a reason for developing more restrictive policies, seemed to have minor impact on decision-makers. Even when accepting the need to join the accords, the foreign ministers during this period did not express great enthusiasm for them or the logic that went behind it. 4

Martelli sought out the support of the Left, including the unions and the Catholic voluntary sector, and made clear to the public that he was doing so. The task was difficult since these actors initially opposed practically all regulation or restriction. Martelli developed an elastic concept of 'programmed numbers' that would be open enough to respect their concerns and yet not constitute an untenable open borders policy.

[DOCLING_PAGE 8]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 235

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

235

In opening to the Left, he dismissed the concerns of conservatives within his own government, who were much more concerned with Schengen and the need for restrictionist policies. 5

The original intention was to pass a series of laws regulating many aspects of immigration, including health services and access to high schools and universities. However, after bitter internal battles in late December, the governing coalition decided on a more narrowly focused emergency decree. This decree law, ( decreto-legge ) which required passage by both houses of parliament in 60 days, was seen as more feasible. The most disputed clauses concerned amnesty for all foreigners who could demonstrate their presence before a certain date and a procedure to programme the annual number of immigrants who could enter the country. 6

The Politics of the PRI: Electoral and Policy Opposition from Within

The PRI strongly opposed this decree, declaring that it was 'offended' by the lack of 'collegiality' in the way the government overruled its objections. The Republicans used obstructionist tactics to threaten pushing the debates past the 60 day time limit. The party only retreated when continuing to push would have prevented the decree's passing and forced a government crisis. As it was, it took 58 days for the lower house to discuss the issue, leaving only two for the Senate to pass on it. A rare all-night session was required to make certain that all amendments were considered. Without the support of the PCI on procedural votes, the law would not have passed in the time allowed.

The rancorous objections of the PRI provoked deep rifts within the governing coalition, with frequent demands that the PRI either support the government's position or go into opposition. Any civility within the coalition quickly disintegrated. The Socialists charged that the Republican party was fishing for votes to its right. Even during the earliest policy debates, the accusations were hard and direct. Claudio Martelli asserted that 'in its desire to compete with the Lega and the MSI, the PRI is offering a political vehicle for the insidious racism that is spreading throughout Italy, as it is throughout European civilization'. Martelli added that the PRI's behaviour 'resembled the sorcerer's apprentice, who speculated on the real problems - the enormous difficulties that accompanied the process of integration, on the frustrations, moods and diffused resentments towards the new arrivals, foreigners and blacks' ( Le Sole/24 Ore , 13 February 1989).

Denying the charge of racism, the PRI claimed that it was the ill thought-out policy that had driven them to opposition. The party employed its traditional language of critique referring to the laxity of the

[DOCLING_PAGE 9]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 236

236

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

government and the need for greater rigour in restricting immigration. 7 The Republicans directed their outrage primarily at the amnesty programme, which it said would make Italy a magnet for third-world immigrants. This language of laxity and rigour had been a part of the PRI political style throughout the 1980s as it often sought to represent itself as the most fiscally responsible governing party (Varni 1985: 62).

A more pernicious element in the rhetorical arsenal concerned the need for Italy to remain part of Europe, both practically and metaphorically. In a concrete sense, it feared that these proposals would distance Italy from the Europe of Schengen. At a symbolic level, it feared that an overly expansive immigration policy would lead Italy into the abyss. As Giorgio La Malfa, Secretary of the PRI, put it in an interview in il Mattino , 'When the three major parties get together, our country departs from Europe and sinks into Africa' ( Il Mattino 14 March 1990).

The PRI also justified its uncompromising opposition by pointing to the way that the policy had been constructed without its support. In defending the PRI's opposition to the legislation before the House of Representatives, La Malfa gave three justifications. First, the governing coalition had no previous programmatic agreement on the subject of immigration which would have bound it to a majority decision. Second, during the hurried policy debates, the PRI was not properly consulted. Third, the PRI's role was frequently and forcefully marginalized by government spokespersons who knew that PCI support of the legislation guaranteed an overwhelming majority without the PRI's votes (Camera dei Deputati 1990a: 746).

More surprising than its obstructionist legislative tactics was the PRI's willingness to use its opposition to the legislation as an electoral issue in the upcoming administrative elections. Its opposition to immigrants is ironic, given that its slogan for the May 1990 administrative elections was 'Your rights are our programme' (Verso il voto del 6 Maggio', supplement to the Voce Repubblicano, 19-20 April 1990). Ritanna Armeni gave the most incisive reading of how this politics of rights applied to immigrants (and Italians) (1990: 10). She argued that the PRI was looking for the votes 'of everyone who felt threatened by those, such as the immigrants, who could take away opportunities, restricting the few rights of citizenry in a precarious, inefficient welfare state'.

During the election campaign, the PRI leadership, primarily La Malfa, raised the issue at every turn. Whether it was delays in the processing of amnesty applicants, an attack on Senegalese vendors in Florence or Martelli's provocative proposal to use the army to police Italy's boundaries, La Malfa sought to use the issue to inject immigration into the election campaign.

[DOCLING_PAGE 10]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 237

237

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

The conflict between the PSI and the PRI, with the other parties standing aside or excluded by media bias, defined the debate over the Martelli legislation. Mainstream parties in Italy had more control over the media than in most western European countries. Not only did the major parties have their own newspaper, but the three public television stations, which at that time monopolized television news coverage, were substantially politicized. The DC, the PSI and the PCI each hegemonized their own stations with which they could put forth their political lines, RAI 1, RAI 2 and RAI 3, respectively.

The mainstream parties' influence also benefited from the sober and responsible press coverage. Although it could be faulted for tardiness in appreciating the gravity of the problem and for occasional superficiality, the Italian press was, in comparison with the sensationalism of tabloids such as the Sun in England or the Bild Zeitung in Germany, a picture of restraint. No Italian newspaper was running titles like those in the Sun , such as 'Arab Pig Sneaks in' (Marletti 1991: 78). The press also limited the circulation of the radical parties' views. As a result, the mainstream parties could communicate their messages without fear of distortion or competition for public attention. In fact, the extent of the press coverage was driven far more by governmental legislative proposals and the debates over them than by any other factor (Marletti 1991: 70).

A government-sponsored study of media coverage presents an unusual opportunity to analyze television coverage. The study, carried out by a private research institute, the ISPES (1990), covers all articles and television news broadcasts relating to immigration politics between January and August of 1990, a period of time that encompasses both the legislative debates and the administrative elections.

This study confirms the public perception of the primacy of the PRI and PSI. It demonstrates the willingness of small governing parties to publicly take on the issue, both in favour and even more surprisingly in opposition. It is most revealing in showing how the mass parties, the DC and the PCI, even though they supported what came to be known as the Martelli Law ( Legge Martelli ), were much more reticent to publicize their stands on the issue. It also shows how the extreme or anti-system parties had no effects on media coverage, in one case as a result of exclusion of its views, and in the other as a result of its own political capacities and strategies.

Considering their electoral weakness, PRI and PSI domination of the television news coverage of the debates is quite striking. The following graphic, which correlates the party's electoral weight with news coverage of its immigration stands, indicates the extraordinary involvement of these two parties in contrast with the reticence of the mass parties.

[DOCLING_PAGE 11]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 238

238

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

GRAPH 1

CORRELATION OF PARTY'S ELECTORAL WEIGHT WITH NEWS COVERAGE OF ITS IMMIGRATION STAND

40,00

30,00

20,00

10,00

0,00

0 10 20 30 40

television news coverage [minutes]

1987 national election vote [%]

Source : Graph derived from ISPES 1990: 70-96

The mass parties, the DC and the PCI, who received 61 per cent of the vote, accounted for only 11 minutes of news time, while three minor parties, who received 20 per cent of the vote, accounted for approximately 66 minutes of television coverage. The PRI, which received 4 per cent of the vote in the most recent national election, managed to garner 18 minutes of coverage. Likewise, the PSI, which had about 14 per cent of the vote, received 37 minutes of coverage.

The DC appeared internally divided over the issue. T o the extent possible, it avoided discussion. In the words of the ISPES study, 'For eight long months, the DC remained silent'. Only in March, when Martelli proposed using the army to patrol the coastline, did many members of the DC intervene (ISPES 1990: 157). 8 The DC's ambivalence can also be seen in the news coverage on its station RAI 1. Despite the party's support for the legislation, the channel allocated far more time to La Malfa (PRI) than to Martelli (PSI) during the period before the law was passed (ISPES 1990: 143). Even more striking was the extent to which Martelli alone was responsible for defending the government's policy. Martelli's declarations account for over 55 per cent of all television coverage of the government discussion. This coverage is almost six times more than either of the most prominent DC spokesman: Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti and Minister of Labour Carlo DonnatCattin. Given that both leaders had previously advocated open immigration policies, this reticence can best be seen as a reluctance of prominent officials to have their party identified with the issue. 9

[DOCLING_PAGE 12]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 239

239

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

As the quantity of new coverage indicates, the PCI was acting with similar discretion. Its two minutes of declarations and news coverage on TG 3 were less than that of the Liberal Party (PLI) a small, conservative party that regularly received only one per cent of the vote (ISPES 1990: 157). This reticence to speak about the issue was striking because the PCI was a strong proponent of the legislation and co-operated closely with Martelli in the process of writing it. 10 This subdued approach can also be seen in the fact that its television station provided the most sustained and substantive coverage of the legislation, supporting the law and Martelli, but rarely quoting PCI officials. Party Secretary Achille Occhetto kept a particularly low profile on the issue. In the non-party press, he was cited 13 times. In the 33 articles in the PCI daily l'Unità , he was never cited (ISPES 1990: 54).

The non-mainstream parties played no role in the public debates. This is particularly striking in the case of the far-right MSI, whose objections to the Legge Martelli were even more fundamental and whose obstructionist tactics even more unforgiving than the PRI's. These actions would not have been known to the viewing public, as the PRI was presented by television and, to a lesser extent, by the newspapers as the only source of opposition. No MSI party members were ever interviewed on the subject, and the party's public declarations only rated 35 seconds in nine discussions (ISPES 1990: 79). This media exclusion did not pass unnoticed among the MSI leadership. On the floor of the Senate, Giovani Pellegatta railed against the fact that the PRI received an overwhelming share of the media coverage. 11 This lack of coverage was consonant with a dominant political culture that considered the MSI too far to the right to be an acceptable participant in democratic politics.

Coverage of the Lega 's statements on immigration was similarly restricted. Until May, after the debates over the passage of the law and the regional elections, the Lega was not shown on television. Even then, it only received 17 seconds of coverage, primarily for suggesting a referendum to repeal the law. This limited coverage was less surprising. With only two legislators, the party was minimally involved in the parliamentary debates. Furthermore, its electoral strategy did not involve working through the mainstream media (Pasquino 1991: 555-64; Mazzoleni 1992: 292).

This analysis of media coverage confirms our understanding that mass parties avoid the issue and supports the claim that what is different about the Italian case is the capacity of small mainstream parties to seek to exploit it. It is to the puzzle of the Lega 's politics to which this article will turn now.

[DOCLING_PAGE 13]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 240

240

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

LEGA : THE UNEXPECTED NON-OPPOSITION

After its passage, the Martelli law was threatened by referendum abrogating the law. The most prominent of these threats came from the Lega . In 1990, with the MSI, PRI and the Lega all opposing the Martelli law in one form or another, the political climate appeared propitious for what Luigi Manconi called 'entrepreneurs of racism' (Manconi 1990: 83). Based largely on the party's rhetoric, key Italian analysts emphasized the intolerant aspects of the Lega (Manconi 1990; Moioli 1990). Drawing on these writings, international analysts constructed frameworks that categorized the Lega in some cases as extreme Right, in others under a right-populist rubric. 12 These analysts were placing the Lega in with parties, that, as my categorization (Figure 1) suggests, have traditionally supported restrictionist, if not to say racist, stands on immigration policies and electoral campaigns.

At the time, there appeared to be ample reason for doing so. Antisouthernism and anti-immigrant sentiments were a primary component of the Lega 's early identity - in Luigi Manconi's telling phrase the Lega opposed 'Southernization of the centralized state and the Africanization of the city' (Manconi 1990: 72). Immigration was seen as undermining Italian community: to Bossi it risked turning Italian cities into American dens of strife and social-breakdown (Bossi 1992: 148).

However, this intolerance of 'others' was only a component of the Lega 's politics, and not one that would maintain a lasting hold. Indeed, the party's rhetoric on the Martelli legislation reveals its most salient interests. It focused not on the immigrants per se , but on the way that a corrupt national political establishment imposed this legislation on the North for its own self-serving reasons (Manconi 1990: 89; Costantini 1994: 187). The Lega subordinated anti-immigrant to anti-system claims. A 1989 pamphlet of the Lega uses capitalization to reveal the true villain:

THE PARTIES OF ROME favour IMMIGRATION FROM THE THIRD WORLD, even though they know that they can not be integrated into our society and will bring grave tensions and racial conflicts. THE PARTIES OF ROME decided AGAINST THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE ... confirm[ing] that THE CENTRALIZED STATE is only an INSTRUMENT in the hands of the GREAT ECONOMIC POWERS and that the parties themselves are by now lacking in POPULAR REPRESENTATION.

Mass industrial immigration is a crime against humanity. It brings social degradation such as drugs, the decline of family and fertility; homosexuality. Only autonomy that combats the CENTRALIZED STATE can stop immigration from the third world, choosing COLLABORATION WITH ALL THE PEOPLE and the distribution of work (Costantini 1994: 190).

[DOCLING_PAGE 14]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 241

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

241

In his writings, Umberto Bossi echoes and amplifies this conspiratorial relation among the established institutions. The parties taken to task for supporting the law were the Communist Party, because it wanted the votes of immigrants; the unions, because they sought members; and the Catholic Church, because it wanted to fill its empty seminaries (Bossi 1992: 23).

The Lega sought to transmute opposition to immigration into antiRoman politics. Even in the 1990 regional elections, its voters differed from mainstream party voters far more on criticisms of the party system and the state than they did on attitudes towards foreigners (Mannheimer 1991: 144-6). While Giorgio Bocca's peculiar defence - that 'the racism of the Lega is nothing other than the racism of the Italians' - was exaggerated, it did capture the fact that Lega voters' attitudes towards immigrants were quite similar to those of other voters (1991: 36).

Other data as well should have given analysts pause. Electoral analysis suggested that the Lega was not, as some had argued, a party on the farright of the spectrum. The data on self-placement on a Left-Right scale shows that in 1991 Lega voters in aggregate placed the party at the centre of the political spectrum, very similar to the overall position of the DC. What differentiated the party from the DC portrait was the range of responses. Whereas in the case of the DC, 67 per cent identified themselves as the centre on a 5 point scale; in the case of the Lega , only 33 per cent so identified themselves (Mannheimer 1994: 127; see also Ignazi 1994: 191-201). In other words, many more Lega voters felt comfortable classifying themselves as far Right or far Left than did the traditional DC voters.

A better way of framing the Lega , and one applied with increasing frequency, is to look at it as a populist party (Biorcio 1992; Donegà 1994; Wieviorka 1994). While the meaning of populism has been disputed, most definitions would include a glorification of popular wisdom or common sense and a distrust of national governmental authority. As the Lega 's discussion of immigration indicates, its antiRome ideology fits squarely within this set of politics.

A second element of Lega populism is a crude popular language. Whether one is discussing the radical right such as the Fascist Party in the 1920s, or the revolutionary Left, such as Lotta Continua, a radical student-worker organization in the 1960s, a break with the traditional language of politics has always accompanied radical politics. The Lega 's particular insight was to use the harshness of its rhetoric as a weapon

[DOCLING_PAGE 15]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 242

242

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

(Iacopini and Bianchi 1994). As Gian Enrico Rusconi noted, it was not the substance of its pronouncements, but the 'polemical nature that accentuated the differentiation, the contraposition, the antagonism' (1992:12).

A third element is the ease and frequency with which the party redefined whom it represented. Always regionally based, the Lega 's definition of the meaning of territoriality changed frequently. Born in 1983, it began as an ethno-regional party in the decentralized industrial periphery in upper Lombardy and north-central Venice region. At this stage, it was using region as a base for a cultural identity in an ethnic sense and its politics were characterized by a visceral anti-southernism. 13 In 1987, when Umberto Bossi from the Lega Lombarda became the predominant figure in Lega politics, he sought to reconstitute the meaning of territory so that it merged community with economic interest. It was a productivist ethic that emphasized how the economic contribution of the citizens of Lombardy was dissipated by a corrupt South and an inefficient public administration. This stage in its politics lasted until 1990 when the Lega Nord focused its critique more explicitly on the party system and corrupt forms of Roman governance. A concomitant of this anti-Roman politics was the merger of the regional leagues of Lombardy, Piedmont and the Veneto and several smaller associations in 1991 into the Lega Nord . This constructed identity had less emotive appeal than the previous regional identities, as there was no pre-existing trans-regional Italian cultural identity. Aside from the electoral advantages of this confederation, it could also more easily make federalist and separatist claims against the national state. This explicit party focus enabled it to assimilate a range of groups whose only common interest was their distrust for the existing parties. This flexibility of ideology went hand in hand with a flexible political strategy.

Even though public opinion grew more sceptical of immigration, the most evident political opportunity for the Lega was in an attack on the state. Aided by the end of the Cold War, which freed voters left and right from their traditional party affiliations, and by investigations into the political corruption scandals called 'Kickback City' ( Tangentopoli ), which brought the old party system farther into disrepute, the Lega advanced emphasizing anti-state and anti-party themes (Diamanti 1993: 17). The 1992 national elections made clear the decline of the First Republic. In that election, the vote for the three main supporters of the Martelli law, the DC, PSI and PCI declined to 59.4 per cent from the 75.2 per cent they had received in the last 1987 national elections. Electoral volatility, an index of how willing Italians were to switch parties, had virtually doubled (Sani 1994: 56).

[DOCLING_PAGE 16]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 243

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

243

With this change in opportunity, the Lega moved away from its antiimmigrant positions and its intolerant rhetoric. As Luciano Costantini's analysis of the Lega's newspaper, Lombardia Autonoma , shows, salience of these themes declined after 1991 (See Segatti 1992: 274).

GRAPH 2 ANALYSIS OF LEGA NEWSPAPER

Source : Costantini 1994: 165

The two indices measure the number of articles reflecting intolerance, hostility towards immigrants or southerners, or conflict hostility towards political institutions, be they parties, the state or the press, as a fraction of the total number during the electoral campaigns between 1982 and 1992 (Costantini 1994: 158-64). 14 Comparing the trajectories of these two indices reveals that until 1991, the change in the number of intolerant articles mirrors the number of conflictual articles. After that, the level of conflictual articles increases, while the number of articles in which intolerance is a theme declines rapidly and by 1992 has disappeared. This decline clearly indicates the Lega 's move away from a politics of intolerance. A vivid example of this change is provided by an electoral video for the 1992 campaign showing Africans working at a construction site in Milan. The implicit message was that those who were working and thus integrated into a productive Milan were acceptable to the Lega . 15

With such a transition in process, the Lega never forced the issue of the referendum repealing the Martelli law. It is always difficult to explain why events did not occur, but the speculation of political actors is revealing. Bossi's own explanation was that the Lega did not want to be seen as merely tearing down existing law without having anything new to propose. Published in 1992, this justification more likely reflects his efforts to move towards the political centre. Not to be overlooked is the possibility that the Lega was simply organizationally incapable of collecting the 500,000 signatures necessary for a referendum throughout the country. 16 The most compelling interpretation is that by threatening to collect the signatures, it could draw public attention to itself, without becoming overly committed to the issue. The latter explanation is consonant with other elements in the Lega 's behaviour. In the Lega 's newspaper, Bossi kept a certain distance from the more vitriolic positions. While roughly 29 per cent of the surveyed Lega articles included some element of intolerance, only 9 per cent of Bossi's statements did. They were most likely to appear in the section called the voice of the simple (' La vos de tucc '), where 61.5 per cent of the articles could be so classified (Costantini 1994: 165-6). An analysis of the Lega 's official publications - addresses at its national convention, documents in 1989 and 1991, as well as its brief campaign platform for the 1990 elections - reveals almost no formal attention given to immigration. At the conventions, the topics formally presented concerned federalism, linguistic concerns, taxation and reform of the national state (Fusella 1993: 93; De Luna 1994: 289-91).

[DOCLING_PAGE 17]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 244

244

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

In its subsequent policy stands in government, the Lega 's evolution towards a less aggressive position towards immigrants emerges even more dramatically. On 27 March 1994, Italy voted for the first time with a majoritarian electoral system. A coalition of the Right, led by Silvio Berlusconi, won in coalition with the Lega and the National Alliance (post-MSI). Although the latter two parties had taken restrictionist positions on immigration questions during the campaign (Pugliese 1994), the issue played no significant role in these elections.

The policy choices confronting the government had not changed significantly since 1990. The legislation intended to complete the task of regulating immigration disappeared without any discussion in Parliament. Subsequent efforts at reform had progressed through the legislature, only to be killed before final approval (Perlmutter 1995b). With the exception of the waves of Albanians who arrived in 1991, the issue disappeared from public attention. Immigration briefly rated a cabinet level ministry in 1991, but was then disenfranchised in May of 1992. As Laura Balbo and Luigi Manconi noted, the only way to discuss an Italian model of immigration policy is with a fine sense of irony, as it denoted a politics of 'non-responses and non-solutions' (Balbo and Manconi 1992: 37).

[DOCLING_PAGE 18]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 245

245

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

Although successful by European standards, the 1990 amnesty campaigns still left a reservoir most reliably estimated at 400,000 to 500,000 people. The debates over how to treat these illegal residents polarized strongly along partisan lines. The Left, most vocally the unions and the voluntary sector, sought to regularize immigrants' statuses with another amnesty programme (Briguglio 1993). The Right sought to deport them and to close the country's borders. Even though popular support for immigration declined substantially since the passage of the Martelli Law (Bonifazi and Gesano 1994), the initial activities of the Berlusconi government gave no indication of any inclination to re-open the immigration issue.

Only in the fall, when an 'emergency' occurred, attracting national press attention, did the government demonstrate any enthusiasm for new legislation (Balbo 1994). At this point, the ambiguities of the Lega 's stands on immigration became evident. On the one hand, the Lega 's legislative proposal was similar to its previous positions: it rejected a total closure of Italy's borders, but denied the possibility of integrating third world immigrants. Making a point of its 'high content of public order', the proposed legislation emphasized the long list of crimes for which immigrants should be immediately expelled, but was silent on provisions for integrating those already in Italy. On the other hand, Roberto Maroni, the Interior Minister from the Lega , was testifying to Parliament to the effect that immigrants already working in Italy and lacking only a 'piece of paper', should be entitled to legalize their status. 17

The relation between the two policy initiatives was never clarified, leaving many political observers and activists confused as to the Lega 's political line. However, the movement away from the earlier antiimmigrant positions is clear. The Lega 's political position continued to evolve, as it broke with its right-wing allies, provoking the fall of the government, and began co-operating with the Left.

CONCLUSION: THE THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE ITALIAN CASE

The conclusions will assess what generalizations might be drawn from the Italian case and suggest future research directions. The Italian case poses two challenges to the general framework for immigration politics. It has found mainstream (pro-system) parties willing to politicize the issue and extremist (anti-system) parties willing to de-politicize it.

The process by which the government arrived at an immigration policy reveals the effects of a fragmented coalition system. Even though the consensus among policy-makers had been growing that new legislation was necessary, until 1989 nothing had been done. Before public concern over the Masslo killing catapulted the issue onto the public agenda, the governing coalition had not taken a programmatic stand on the issue. By moving publicly and visibly to an inclusive policy, the Socialists, under Martelli's lead, created a coalition that encompassed the opposition, but not the more conservative members of the government. The conflict was exacerbated by the government not responding to the Republicans' objections before the legislation was proposed, and flaunting the fact that it was going to pass this legislation with the votes of the Communist Party. This chaotic way of proceeding left space open for the PRI to wage a 'principled' opposition on formal as well as substantive grounds.

[DOCLING_PAGE 19]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 246

246

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

These small parties clearly staked out more decisive positions than the mass parties, the DC and the PCI, which behaved as our traditional set of theoretical tools would predict. The mass parties supported moderately open immigration policies, but primarily in closed forums. Even though they provided crucial support for the legislation in parliament, these parties were rarely heard from during the critical months of public discussion.

Future research on small party willingness to politicize the issue should focus both on systemic constraints and internal party variables. In a party system where small increases in electoral support translated into advantage within the governing coalition, there was an incentive for the PSI to take an outspoken stand and for the PRI to publicize its exclusion from the policy-making circle and its support for more restrictive policies. The constituencies and leadership structures of the party facilitated these strategies. The highly-educated, new middle class constituencies that these parties aspired to represent were less likely to directly confront or be troubled by immigrants than the mass base of the DC and the PCI (ISPES 1990: 157). Both the PSI and the PRI had centralized leadership (Pridham 1991). In fact, neither Martelli nor La Malfa felt obliged to seek out formal party approval for their positions; nor was there strong intra-party opposition to their outspoken positions.

Further analysis should also involve looking at countries with fragmented multi-party systems similar to Italy's to see if they have equivalent difficulties in de-politicizing the issue. This research direction is also suggested by the fact that the successful cases of keeping immigration off the agenda - Britain in the early 1960s, France in the early 1970s and Germany before the mid-1980s - all occurred in party systems characterized by low degrees of fragmentation.

On the other side of the traditional theoretical divide, the Lega 's reluctance to press for more restrictive policies raises theoretical issues

[DOCLING_PAGE 20]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 247

247

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

concerning how to classify western European extremist parties. Either one could insist that the party fits with the Right, anti-system category, in which case the immigration framework needs reconsideration, or one could argue that the case requires a new location. This article has sustained that the Lega does not fit in the Right/anti-system box in which many Italian and foreign analysts had originally placed it. The argument is that the Lega is a radical populist party and that such parties are particularly flexible in altering their ideologies and strategies, depending on what opportunities present themselves. By 1991-92, the Lega , having benefited from the crisis of the Italian political system which it had helped to create, found itself a 'monopolist in the land of distrust' (Diamanti 1993: 88) towards parties and the state and had far less need to be an 'entrepreneur of racism'.

I would thus suggest the need to speak of a radicalism of the centre, to describe the location of populist parties. Although their politics are anti-system, the position on a Left-Right political spectrum fluctuates. While they would find it difficult to propose expansive immigration politics, their commitment to restrictive policies appears intermittent and they are likely, if a better opportunity emerges, to downplay or even to disregard the issue.

The most sweeping theorization of recent populism in European politics has been carried out by Hans-Georg Betz (1993; 1994). His formulation is, however, overly inclusive, both theoretically and empirically. He writes of radical right-wing populism, where radical implies a global rejection of the political and social system in the name of a liberal free market economy; Right implies rejection of equality and exclusion of marginal groups, on xenophobic, if not racist grounds; and populism implies an appeal to superiority of common sense and the exploitation of public anxiety (Betz 1994: 4). This formulation includes parties firmly locked into the extreme right of the party system such as the German Republikaner and the French National Front, as well as parties such as the Swiss Auto Party and the Lega , whose politics and ideology are more difficult to anchor.

My objection, based on the Lega case, is the conflation of Right and radical. In his earlier writings, Betz subsumes all these parties under a single, undifferentiated category. More recently, he has sought to differentiate more clearly between nationalist populist and neo-liberal populist formations, that is, between those parties most clearly located on the far Right and those driven more by neo-liberal economic policies. He has, however, still argued for a common definition of a rather extended political family. Based on my assessment of the Lega , I would argue for a more fundamental break, claiming that there is more than one family of radicalism in western Europe, particularly if one is looking to explain parties' policies on immigration.

[DOCLING_PAGE 21]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 248

248

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

The most intriguing case to follow would be the Freedom Party (FPOE) in Austria, classified by Betz as a neo-liberal populist case (Plasser and Ulram 1992). In 1991, the party took up the issue of immigration, after having previously focused on anti-government claims (Betz 1994: 125). Should it downplay the issue, this action would tend to confirm the claim that populist parties are a distinct family of parties, whose claims are not to be lumped with those of an extreme Right.

On the whole, this article has suggested that Italy provides a cautionary note to generalizations about party behaviour, and a need to modify hypotheses generated from cases where party coalitions were more coherent and the boundary between mainstream and extreme parties was clearer. A corollary to this analysis is a certain scepticism about the role of ideology, which is often used in categorizing political parties.

Regarding immigration, party ideologies often conceal as much as they reveal. Those who followed the public statements of the PRI or the Lega prior to the Martelli Law would have been hard-pressed to explain their subsequent stands. Immigration proved to be an issue with numerous valences that defied simple proor anti-immigrant classification. For the PRI, the issue resonated well with the language of laxity and rigour, a dualism constitutive of its political rhetoric throughout the 1980s. For the Lega , it has been subsumed under the anti-central government logic.

In modern democratic politics, decoding rhetoric is made more difficult by the fact that an accusation of racism is sufficiently damaging that parties will seek to obscure their claims. The PRI claimed that it was taking the high road, concerned only with developing a suitably rigorous policy for the regulation of the immigration question. It denied all accusations that it was being an entrepreneur of racist politics. For example, it strove to differentiate its rhetoric from the MSI's in the legislative debates. The PRI maintained that it referred to immigrants as workers, whose interests needed to be protected, whereas the MSI used the more colloquial ' vu cumpra ', a derogatory reference to the fact that many immigrants were street vendors asking if people wanted to buy their goods.

However, a close analysis of the PRI commitment to 'Europe' shows that they too were willing to use immigration to define another 'other'. La Malfa's rhetoric that the mainstream parties were a populist conspiracy that would drag Italy to African levels was in many ways a softer version of the MSI and Lega rhetoric on this point.

[DOCLING_PAGE 22]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 249

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

249

For the Lega , their rhetoric in 1989 and 1990 would turn out to be a guide - it was just difficult to read at the time. The subordination of antiimmigrant themes to anti-Roman ones in its official discourse proved a good marker as to where its politics would go. Analysts and the public were misled as much by the tone of the rhetoric, the deliberately affected populist crudeness of Bossi's pronouncements and the Lega newspaper, as by the substance of what they were saying.

In sum, Italian immigration politics illustrate a cautionary tale regarding our abilities to generalize about immigration. These politics do not call into question the fundamental framework, but they suggest the need to define more clearly what kinds of mainstream and radical parties are likely to support or oppose immigration legislation. They also suggest the difficulties of using party ideology as a guide to its classification. The marketplace for racist and anti-immigrant politics is not likely to shrink in the near future, and the guide to its purveyors should be as accurate as possible.

NOTES

Research for this project was funded by a research award from the J. William Fulbright Scholar program. The research could not have been done without the assistance of the Fondazione Agnelli and the Center for the Study of Emigration in Rome. For their comments on earlier drafts, I would like to thank Steven Hellman, Leah Haus, Chiara Ferrari, Marty Schain, Enrico Pugliese and the anonymous reviewers and editors at South European Society & Politics .

In Sartori's definition, ' A party can be defined as being anti-system whenever it undermines the legitimacy of the regime it opposes ' (1976: 133). Recently, classification schemes for extreme right parties based on this definition have been developed by Minkenberg (1991) and Ignazi (1994).

In an interview at the time of the debates, Ottaviano Del Turco, a leader of the largest Italian union, the CGIL, used the dual labour market position in justification of open policies, Nuova Rassegna Sindacale 32 (11 Sept. 1989) p.15. The extent to which this view was widely diffused can be seen in the testimony of Giulio Andreotti, in his capacity as foreign minister, before a parliamentary committee investigating racism, that foreigners were not taking Italian's jobs (Camera dei Deputati 1990b: 73).

According to one of his chief advisors, Gianni De Michelis, the foreign minister at the time, was not particularly concerned with Schengen (Interview with advisor to De Michelis, 27 July 1994). De Michelis made no secret of his disagreement with the more restrictive policy espoused by Italy's northern neighbors. See his commentary at a national conference (Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri 1991: 118). The previous foreign minister Giulio Andreotti testified before parliament on 26 Jan. 1989 that Schengen 'create[d] not a few difficulties' with North African countries and Turkey. Even though he did not see Schengen as a solution to the problems posed by immigration, he saw it as inevitable that Italy would become a member (Camera dei Deputati 1990b: 72, 83).

See La Stampa, 29 Aug. 1989; il Manifesto, 31 Aug. 1989; CGIL press release, 12 Sept. 1989; Il Mattino, 13 Sept. 1989; and Corriere della Sera, 13 Sept. 1989.

The requisites for Italy being able to enter into the Schengen accords, the termination of the geographic exemptions on refugees and the proposals to require visas, were not

[DOCLING_PAGE 23]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 250

250

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

as contested.

In the policy discussions, see Giorgio T ullio Covi's testimony at the parliamentary hearings (Camera dei Deputati 1990a: 827); on the electoral side, see 'Verso il voto del 6 Maggio', supplement to the Voce Repubblicano, 19-20 April 1990.

On the claims of unacknowledged DC divisions, see testimony of Giorgio Tullio Covi (PRI) in the legislative hearings (Camera dei Deputati 1990a: 826).

Andreotti's position on immigration policy can be seen in his testimony before the Congressional Investigation on racism in 1989 (Camera dei Deputati 1990a: 71-86). Carlo Donnat-Cattin's position can be seen in his address at a national policy conference on immigration (Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri 1991: 183).

Interview with Siliva Barbieri (PCI), Vice President of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, 22 March 1995.

See the testimony of Giovani Pellegatta (MSI) in the Senate hearings (Camera dei Deputati 1990a: 518). Given the ways that they talked about immigrants as creating 'impenetrable casbahs' and 'jungles' (835), of making Italy 'another Africa' (526), not to mention an outburst of classic antisemitism in saying that an unknown Jew was responsible for supplying third-world immigrants with counterfeit merchandise (238), one can say that they were well-served by this censorship.

These analysts would include Kitschelt (1991), Husbands (1988), Pfahl-Traugher (1993), and Betz (1993; 1994). In more recent work Kitschelt (1995) has changed his position in ways that distinguish Italian and Austrian parties from parties of the right in other countries.

The periodisation was developed in Diamanti (1993).

A .8 index means that 80% of the articles included the given topic.

The video, 'Tutto quello che avreste voluto sapere sulla Lega e che non vi hanno mai raccontato', 1992, and the interpretation come from Betz (1994: 122).

Telephone interview with Luigi Negri, head of the Lega's parliamentary delegation, 14 March 1995. Luigi Manconi, who initially saw this referendum as a chance for the Lega to expand its influence, later saw its failure as tied to its forms of militancy and social organization. Compare Balbo and Manconi (1992: 87) with Manconi (1990: 89).

The Lega legislative proposal was No.1327, 26 Sept. 1994. On Maroni's position see his testimony before the House Commission on Constitutional Affairs, 1st Commission, 12th Legislature, 11 Oct. 1994, pp.96-7, and La Repubblica, 12 Oct. 1994.

REFERENCES

Adinolfi, A. (1992): I lavoratori extracomunitari: Norme interne e internazionali , Bologna: il Mulino.

Armeni, R. (1990): 'Il Pri si mette in Liga', Rinascità 8/1, pp.9-11.

Balbo, L. (1994): 'Passagio di fase [a partire dagli immigrati]', Politica ed Economia 4/5-6, pp.20-1.

Balbo, L. and L. Manconi (1992): I razzismi reali , Milan: Feltrinelli.

Betz, H.-G. (1993): 'The New Politics of Resentment: Radical Right-Wing Populist Parties in Western Europe', Comparative Politics 26, pp.413-27.

Betz, H.-G. (1994): Radical Right-Wing Populism in Western Europe , NY: St. Martin's.

Biorcio, R. (1992): 'Il populismo regionalista della Lega nord', Democrazia e Diritto 32/2, pp.239-56.

Bocca, G. (1991): La disunità d'Italia , Milan: Garzanti.

Bonifazi, C. and G. Gesano (1994): 'L'immigrazione straniera tra regolazione dei flussi e politiche di accoglimento', in A. Golini (ed.), Tendenze demografiche e politiche per la popolazione: Terzo rapporto IRP sulla situazione demografica italiana , Bologna: Il Mulino, pp.259-92.

Bossi, U. (with Daniele Vimercati) (1992): Vento dal Nord , Milan: Sperling and Kupfer.

[DOCLING_PAGE 24]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 251

IMMIGRATION POLITICS ITALIAN STYLE

251

Briguglio, S. (1993): 'Linee per una nuova politica dell'immigrazione', Affari Sociali Internazionali 21/4, pp.73-82.

Camera dei Deputati (1990a): Cittadini extracommunitari in Italia. I lavori preparatori della legge 28 febbraio 1990 n. 39 , Rome: Camera dei Deputati.

Camera dei Deputati (1990b): Dossier Immigrazione e razzismo , Rome: Rassegna Stampa Camera dei Deputati.

Caritas diocesana di Roma (1993): Immigrazione: Dossier statistico 1993 , Rome: Anterem. Costantini, L. (1994): Dentro la Lega: Come nasce, come cresce, come comunica , Rome: Koinè Edizioni.

De Luna, G. (1994): 'Dalla spontaneità all'organizzazione: La resistibile ascesa della Lega di Bossi',in G. De Luna (ed.), Figli di un benessere minore: storia della Lega 1979-1993 , Milan: La Nuova Italia, pp.21-80.

Diamanti, I. (1993): La Lega: Geografia, storia e sociologia di un nuovo soggetto politico , Rome: Donzelli Editore.

Donegà, C. (1994): 'Strategie del presente. I volti della Lega', in G. De Luna (ed.), Figli di un benessere minore: storia della Lega 1979-1993 , Milan: La Nuova Italia, pp.81-135.

DOXA (1991): 'Gli Stranieri in Italia. Risultati di tre sondaggi: del maggio 1991, del Novembre 1989 e del luglio 1987', Bolletino Della Doxa , /9-10-11.

Freeman, G.P . (1979): Immigrant Labor and Racial Conflict in Industrial Societies: The French and British Experience, 1945-1975 , Princeton: PUP .

Freeman, G.P . (1995): 'Modes of Immigration Politics in the Liberal Democratic States', International Migration Review 29/4, pp.881-97.

Fusella, A. (1993): Arrivano i barbari. La Lega nel racconto di quotidiani e periodici , Milan: Rizzoli.

Hammar, T. (1985): 'Comparative Analysis', in Thomas Hammar (ed.), European Immigration Policy: A Comparative Study , Cambridge: CUP , pp.239-305.

Hollifield, J.F. (1992): Immigrants, Markets and States: The Political Economy of Postwar Europe , Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP .

Husbands, C. (1988): 'The Dynamic of Racial Explusion in Western Europe', European Journal of Political Research 16, pp.701-22.

Iacopini, R. and S. Bianchi (1994): La Lega ce l'ha crudo! , Milan: Mursia.

Ignazi, P . (1994): L'Estrema Destra in Europa , Bologna: Mulino.

ISPES (1990): La Legge Martelli e i mass-media: analisi di contenuto , Rome: ISPES.

Katznelson, I. (1976 ): Black Men: White Cities: Race, Politics, and Migration in the United States and Britain, 1948-1968 , Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

Kitschelt, H. (1991): 'Left Libertarians and Right-Authoritarians: Is the New Right a Response to the New Left in European Politics', paper delivered at the Conference on the Radical Right in Western Europe, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Kitschelt, H. in collaboration with A.J. Mcann (1995): The Radical Right in Western Europe: A Comparative Analysis , Ann Arbor: U. of Michigan Press.

Lange, P . and M. Regini (ed.) (1989): State, Market, and Social Regulation: New Perspectives on Italy , Cambridge: CUP .

Manconi, L. (1990): 'Razzismo interno, razzismo esterno e strategia del chi c'è c'è', in Laura Balbo and Luigi Manconi (eds.), I razzismi possibili , Milan: Feltrinelli, pp.45-101.

Mannheimer, R. (1991): 'Chi vota Lega e perché', in R. Mannheimer (ed.), La Lega Lombarda , Milan: Feltrinelli, pp.122-58.

Mannheimer, R. (1994): 'La natura compositiva dell'elettorato leghista', in G. Sani and R. Mannheimer (eds.), La Rivoluzione elettorale: L 'Italia tra la prima e la seconda repubblica , Milan: Anabasi, pp.119-48.

Marletti, C. (1991): Extracomunitari. Dall'immaginario collettivo al vissuto quotidiano del razzismo , Rome: Nuova Eri.

Mazzoleni, G. (1992): 'Quando la pubblicità elettorale non serve', Polis 6/2, pp.291-304.

Minkenberg, M. (1991): 'The New Right in France and Germany. A Comparative Analysis of Changing Cleavage Structures and New Configurations in European Politics', Ninth International Conference of Europeanists.

[DOCLING_PAGE 25]

Downloaded by [The University of Manchester Library] at 22:56 23 January 2015

CH04PERL.QXD 9/24/07 5:14 PM Page 252

252

SOUTH EUROPEAN SOCIETY & POLITICS

Moioli, V . (1990): I nuovi razzismi: Miserie e fortune della Lega Lombarda , Rome: Edizioni Associate.

Pasquino, G. (1987): 'Party Government in Italy: Achievements and Prospects', in R.S. Katz (ed.), Party Governments: European and American Experiences , NY: De Gruyter, pp.202-42.

Pasquino, G. (1991): 'Meno partiti più lega', Polis 5/3, pp.555-64.

Perlmutter, T. (1995a): 'Italian Immigration Politics in the 1990s: The Decline of Parties and the Rise of Interest Groups', American Political Science Association Meetings, 3 Sept. 1995.

Perlmutter, T. (1995b): 'The Political Asylum Debates in Germany: Extreme Politics in a Moderate Party System?', American Political Science Association Meetings, 3 Sept. 1995.

Perlmutter, T. (1996): 'Bringing Parties Back In: Comments on 'Modes of Immigration Politics in Liberal Democratic Societies'', International Migration Review 30/1, pp.375-88.

Pfahl-Traugher, A. (1993): 'Rechtspopulistische Parteien in Westeuropa', In E. Jesse (ed.), Politischer Extremismus in Deutschland und Europa , München: Bayerischer Landzentrale für politische Bildungsarbeit, pp.39-56.

Plasser, F. and P .A. Ulram (1992): 'Uberdehnung, erosion and rechtspolitische Reaktion. Wandlungsfactoren des Österreichischens Parteiensystems im Vergleich', Österreichische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft 21/2, pp.147-64.

Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri (1991): Atti della Conferenza Nazionale dell'Immigrazione , Rome: Editalia.

Pridham, G. (1988): Political Parties and Coalitional Behavior in Italy , London: Routledge.

Pridham, G. (1991): 'Italian Small Parties in Comparative Perspective', in F. MüllerRommel and G. Pridham (eds.), Small Parties in Western Europe: Comparative and National Perspectives , London: Sage, pp.71-94.

Pugliese, E. (1994): 'il sostenibile', Il Manifesto (March), pp.19-21.

Rusconi, G.E. (1992): 'Prendere la Lega sul serio', Micromega /5, pp.99-104.

Sani, G. (1994): 'Il verdetto del 1992', in G. Sani and R. Mannheimer (eds.), La Rivoluzione elettorale: L 'Italia tra la prima e la seconda repubblica , Milan: Anabasi, pp.37-70.

Sartori, G. (1976): Parties and Party Systems: A Framework for Analysis , Cambridge: CUP . Segatti, P . (1992): 'L 'offerta politica e i candidati della Lega alle elezioni amministrative del 1990', Polis 6/2, pp.257-80.

Tichenor, D.J. (1994): 'The Politics of Immigration Reform in the United States, 1981-1992', Polity 26/3, pp.333-62.

Varni, A. (1985): 'Il Pri nell'Italia repubblicana: Scelte politiche e linee organizzative dal 1946 ad oggi', Misure: Material Di Recerca Dell'Istituto Cattaneo 10-11, pp.11-66.

Veugelers, J.W .P . (1994): 'Recent Immigration Politics in Italy: A Short Story', in M. Baldwin-Edwards and M. Schain (eds.), The Politics of Immigration in Western Europe , London: Frank Cass, pp.33-49.

Wieviorka, M. (1994): 'Conclusion', in M. Wieviorka (ed.), Racisme et xénophobie en europe: Une comparaison internationale , Paris: La Découverte, pp.285-94.
