ICTRP Search Portal
Main
Note: This record shows only 24 elements of the WHO Trial Registration Data Set. To view changes that have been made to the source record, or for additional information about this trial, click on the URL below to go to the source record in the primary register.
Register: | IRCT
Last refreshed on: | 7 October 2019
Main ID: | IRCT20161022030421N4
Date of registration: | 2019-07-16
Prospective Registration: | No
Primary sponsor: | Bagheiat-allah University of Medical Sciences
Public title: | The effect of Dexmedetomidin infusion in the intensive care unit
Scientific title: | Clinical trial comparing the sedative effect of Dexmedetomidin infusion versus placebo in the intensive care unit on patients undergoing open heart surgery under cardiopulmonary bypass pump.
Date of first enrolment: | 2019-07-11
Target sample size: | 60
Recruitment status: | Recruiting
URL: | http://en.irct.ir/trial/37914
Study type: | interventional
Study design: | Randomization: Randomized, Blinding: Double blinded, Placebo: Used, Assignment: Parallel, Purpose: Health service research, Randomization description: Randomization was stratified using a random table number, Blinding description: The medication or placebo is prepared and coded by the co-worker in a 50cc syringe. Each cc of the solution in the syringe contains four micrograms of Dexmedetomidine or a placebo. The patient and the researcher and the specialist nurses will not be informed of the prepared syringe's contents. Researcher will be injected into a patient for 10 minutes from a randomized encoded syringe, equivalent to 1 µg / kg Dexmedetomidine and then the medicine will be infused In a volume equivalent to 0.2 to 0.7 micrograms per kilogram, in accordance with the patient's needs. Upon completion of the sampling, the co-worker will provide the information about the coding of the syringes.
Phase: | 3
Countries of recruitment
Iran (Islamic Republic of) |  |  |  |  |  |  |
Contacts
Contact type: | public
Name: | Marzieh Lak
Address: | Baqiyatallah University of Medical Science, Mollasadra Street, Sheikhbahai Street, Tehran, Iran 1435915371 Tehran Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Telephone: | +98 212449013
Email: | marziehlak@bmsu.ac.ir
Affiliation: | Bagheiat-allah University of Medical Sciences
Contact type: | scientific
Name: | Marzieh Lak
Address: | Baqiyatallah University of Medical Science, Mollasadra Street, Sheikhebahahi Street, Tehran, Iran 1435915371 Tehran Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Telephone: | +98 212449013
Email: | marziehlak@bmsu.ac.ir
Affiliation: | Bagheiat-allah University of Medical Sciences
Key inclusion & exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria: Patients referred for coronary artery bypass grafting after obtaining informed consent Exclusion criteria: Emergency patients Has a history of liver disease, kidney disease, heart block grade 2 or 3 Systolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg History of psychological disease Use of psychological drugs Opioid addiction Re- surgery Age minimum: no limit Age maximum: no limit Gender: Both
Health Condition(s) or Problem(s) studied
Patients undergoing heart surgery with CPP pump.. Atherosclerotic heart disease of native coronary artery
I25.1
Intervention(s)
Intervention 1: Intervention group: Dexmedetomidine is infused at a dose of 1 µg / kg for 10 minutes and the patient is transferred to the ICU and placed under mechanical ventilation. In ICU, a low dose infusion of 0.2 µg / kg of infusion begins, and, according to the patient's need, the dosage of the drug increases to 0.7 µg / kg for the purpose of achieving Richmond agitation-sedation scale 1-2 + 1. After the extubation condition, the patient is extubated and the dosage of Dexmedetomidine is continued with the aim of achieving RASS 0 (calm and alert). Intervention 2: Control group: after the completion of surgery, placebo (normal saline) is infused over 10 minutes (due to the blindness of the study), and the patient is transferred to the ICU and placed under mechanical ventilation. ICU will find a placebo infusion. In this group, the purpose of sedation is until the patient is mechanically ventilated by RASS -2_ + 1 and after extruding RASS 0.
Primary Outcome(s)
Duration of mechanical ventilation. Timepoint: From the patient's arrival to the intensive care unit until the tracheal tube is removed, in hours. Method of measurement: From the patient's arrival to the intensive care unit until the tracheal tube is removed, in hours.
Duration of stay in the intensive care unit. Timepoint: From the arrival of the patient to the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit is evaluated by the unit of the day. Method of measurement: From the arrival of the patient to the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit is evaluated by the unit of the day.
Incidence of arrhythmia. Timepoint: From the patient's entrance to the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit is assessed by continuous monitoring of electrocardiogram by a specialist nurse. Method of measurement: From the patient's entrance to the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit is assessed by continuous monitoring of electrochardiogram by a specialist nurse.
Assessment of Nurses' satisfaction in ICU. Timepoint: During the period of hospital stay in the intensive care unit by three specialist nurses, using VAS score. Method of measurement: During the period of hospital stay in the intensive care unit by three specialist nurses, using VAS score.
Incidence of delirium. Timepoint: From the arrival of the patient to the intensive care unit until the patient's discharge from the intensive care unit, the nurse will be evaluated in each shift. Method of measurement: Confusion assessment method for the ICU (CAM-ICU ).
Reducing the dose required by morphine and midazolam to achieve desired urination. Timepoint: The patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the patient's discharge from the intensive care unit is calculated in milligrams. Method of measurement: The patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the patient's discharge from the intensive care unit is calculated in milligrams.
Secondary Outcome(s)
Changes in blood pressure. Timepoint: From the beginning of the patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the first six hours, blood pressure was recorded every hour.Then from the sixth hour until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit was recorded every 3 hours. Method of measurement: From the beginning of the patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the first six hours, blood pressure was recorded every hour.Then from the sixth hour until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit was recorded every 3 hours.
Heart rate. Timepoint: From the beginning of the patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit, heart rate was continuously monitored and recorded. Method of measurement: From the beginning of the patient's arrival in the intensive care unit until the discharge of the patient from the intensive care unit, heart rate was continuously monitored and recorded.
Secondary ID(s)
Source(s) of Monetary Support
Bagheiat-allah University of Medical Sciences
Secondary Sponsor(s)
Ethics review
Status: | Approved
Approval date: |
Contact name: | Ethics Committee of Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences
Contact address: | Baqiyatallah University of Medical Science, Mollasadra Street, Sheikh Bahaee Street, Tehran, Iran Tehran Tehran Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Contact telephone: |
Contact email: |
Results
Results available: |
URL: |
URL of the protocol: |
Date Posted: |
Date of completion: |
Date of first publication: |
Results summary: |
Baseline characteristics: |
Adverse events: |
Outcome measures: |
IPD sharing plan: | Yes - There is a plan to make this available
IPD sharing description: | What will be shared: all collected deidentified IPD When: starting 1 months after publication To whom: people working in academic institutions Conditions: for meta analysis Where to obtain: from Email How to obtain: By sending a request to the university Vice-Dean for Research and obtaining a license Comments:
