[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine

ISSN: 1747-6348 (Print) 1747-6356 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ierx20

High flow nasal cannula in the pediatric intensive care unit

Jason A. Clayton, Katherine N. Slain, Steven L. Shein & Ira M. Cheifetz

To cite this article: Jason A. Clayton, Katherine N. Slain, Steven L. Shein & Ira M. Cheifetz (2022) High flow nasal cannula in the pediatric intensive care unit, Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine, 16:4, 409-417, DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2022.2049761

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2022.2049761

Published online: 07 Mar 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 654

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ierx20

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

EXPERT REVIEW OF RESPIRATORY MEDICINE, 2022

VOL. 16, NO. 4, 409-417 https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2022.2049761

REVIEW

High flow nasal cannula in the pediatric intensive care unit

Jason A. Clayton a , Katherine N. Slain a , Steven L. Shein a and Ira M. Cheifetz b

a Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio USA; b Division of Pediatric Cardiac Critical Care Medicine, Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio USA

ABSTRACT

Introduction: The use of high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) has become widely used in pediatric intensive care units (PICUs) throughout the world. The rapid adoption has outpaced the number of studies evaluating the safety and efficacy in a variety of pediatric diseases/conditions.

Areas covered: This scoping review begins with the definition and mechanisms of action of HFNC and then follows with a review of the literature focused on studies performed on critically ill children cared for in the PICU. The PubMed database was searched with a pediatric filter from the time period 2000 to 2021.

Expert opinion: The rapid adoption of HFNC in PICUs has largely been driven by changes in institu­ tional practices and small observational studies. There is a lack of adequately powered studies evaluat­ ing patient-centered outcomes, such as intubation rates, mortality, PICU, and hospital length of stay. Given the wide variability in flow rates and clinical indications, more research is needed to better define effective flow rates for different disease states as well as markers of treatment success and failure. One particular entity that is poorly studied is the use of HFNC in those at risk for developing pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS).

1. Introduction

The use of high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) has become widely used in intensive care units (ICUs) throughout the world. First described in the early 1990s, its use was pioneered as an alternative to noninvasive positive pressure for the treatment of respiratory dis­ tress syndrome in neonates, including premature infants [1-5]. In parallel, the use of HFNC was studied in adult populations with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [6,7], hypoxemic respira­ tory failure [8-11], and post-extubation respiratory distress [12-15]. Application of HFNC in pediatric patients was initially slow to be adopted, but subsequently, its use and study has increased sig­ nificantly. A PubMed search for 'high flow nasal cannula' with a pediatric search filter shows an exponential increase in manu­ scripts from a single study in 2001 to over 100 in 2019.

While initially studied in children with acute viral bronch­ iolitis, disease indications for treatment with HFNC have broa­ dened to include asthma, acute hypoxemic respiratory failure including pneumonia, obstructive sleep apnea, and postextubation respiratory distress. The purpose of this scoping review is to provide an overview of the literature as it relates to the use of HFNC in the PICU. After a brief description of the currently accepted mechanisms of gas exchange during HFNC, we will describe the available literature regarding its use in the pediatric critical care environment.

1.1. Methodology

We performed a scoping review by searching PubMed using the key phrase 'high flow nasal cannula' with a pediatric filter

ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 7 October 2021 Accepted 2 March 2022

KEYWORDS

High flow nasal cannula; pediatric intensive care unit; acute lung injury; pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome; bronchiolitis; hypoxia; hypercapnia; infant; pediatric

within the time period of 2000 through 2021. Abstracts and reference lists were individually examined by one author (JC) to retrieve articles that studied HFNC specific to the PICU setting. Only articles written in English were considered. Both observational studies and prospective trials were included in this review.

2. Definition and mechanisms of action

HFNC is sometimes referred to as heated, humidified, highflow nasal cannula, highlighting all the important aspects that define its use. Traditionally, unconditioned flow rates of less than 1-2 L/min in neonates and less than 4-6 L/min in chil­ dren are classified as low-flow, or conventional, nasal cannula [16]. While there is no established flow rate that defines high flow, many studies have postulated that flow delivery should meet or exceed the patient's peak spontaneous inspiratory flow [17-23]. As HFNC has become more commonly used, researchers have determined that flow rates of 1-2 L/kg/min can be effective in treating children with respiratory distress [17-23].

Several mechanisms may explain the beneficial effects of HFNC; however, the relative effective contribution of each mechanism in an individual patient is generally not entirely clear. As one of the primary functions of the nasopharynx is to warm and humidify the air that we breathe, the first mechan­ ism by which HFNC is effective is by augmenting the delivery of warm, humidified gas via a HFNC system. HFNC maintains the hydration status of the nasal mucosa, reduces the

CONTACT Jason A. Clayton

Jason.clayton@uhhospitals.org

© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

11100 Euclid Avenue, Mailstop 6010, Cleveland, Ohio, 44016 USA

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

410

J. A. CLAYTON ET AL.

Article highlights

Several mechanisms are postulated to demonstrate efficacy of HFNC, including improving mucociliary clearance and reducing bronchoreac­ tivity with heated and humidified gas, increasing effective FiO 2 by providing oxygen-rich gas, washing out nasopharyngeal deadspace, improving work of breathing by improving diaphragm dynamics, and reducing airway resistance by applying positive pharyngeal pressure.

The application of HFNC in the pediatric intensive care unit, initially studied as an alternative for noninvasive ventilation, has largely been driven by small observational studies that have been generally con­ sistent in showing a therapeutic benefit with respect to vital signs and clinical measures of the patient's work of breathing, although defini­ tive outcome data are lacking.

The most common and well-studied indication for HFNC in the PICU is acute bronchiolitis.

For asthma, aerosol delivery via HFNC is significantly reduced with higher flow rates and smaller cannula sizes.

More research is needed in patients at risk for PARDS, including optimal flow rates, risk factors for progression to PARDS, and factors related to prevention of progression to PARDS.

There is wide variability in practice with respect to flow settings and disease indications as well as a lack of studies evaluating indications for initiating, escalating, and weaning of HFNC therapy.

When compared to conventional therapies, HFNC appears safe in a variety of conditions including asthma, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and post-extubation respiratory distress.

Given the broad acceptance of HFNC and perceived lack of equipoise, future studies utilizing the tools of Quality Improvement may be helpful to design initiation and weaning protocols and appropriate flow rates for a range of disease indications.

metabolic work required to condition dry, cold gas, improves mucociliary clearance, decreases airway resistance, and reduces insensible water losses [16,21,23]. Also, by not desic­ cating the nasal passages, HFNC provides more comfort and better tolerance of the higher flow rates of gas [16,21,23,24].

A second mechanism proposes that HFNC significantly reduces the entrainment of ambient air, thereby increasing the effective fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO 2 ), contrary to low-flow oxygen delivery systems. Third, HFNC is postulated to flush the carbon dioxide-rich gas from the nasopharynx and replace it with oxygen-enriched gas from the HFNC system. This reduces the carbon dioxide that is rebreathed, thus facil­ itating improved minute ventilation participating in gas exchange. By improving carbon dioxide clearance, work of breathing may also be reduced [25,26]. Fourth, work of breath­ ing is improved by decreasing the pressure × rate product, which is a validated measure of work of breathing [26-29]. Fifth, the application of high-flow gas reduces airway resis­ tance during inspiration [16,21,24,30]. Experimental placement of pharyngeal pressure transducers has demonstrated that distending pressures of up to 6-8 cm H2O can be obtained with flow rates up to 2 L/kg/min [21,23,28,31]. This may effec­ tively stent the soft palate and pharyngeal structures. Overall, careful titration of flow rate contributes to several important characteristics toward making HFNC effective.

Additionally, while HFNC may provide positive distending pressures to the upper airway, the delivery of positive pressure to the distal airways and alveoli remains controversial. Several studies have explored this by measuring pharyngeal pressures as a surrogate for end-expiratory pressure and found that higher flow rates are proportional to higher pharyngeal pres­ sures [21,23,24,28,32]. This is confounded by the open system of HFNC and the intentional use of non-occlusive nasal can­ nula. Therefore, it is unlikely that the alveoli experience similar pressures as seen in the pharynx. Also, in periods of respiratory distress, one may see significant mouth breathing, which further adds to the anatomic leak and loss of distal pressure transduction [33]. Studies have measured esophageal pres­ sures as a marker of intrathoracic pressures during the appli­ cation of HFNC [26,29,31]. In these investigations, the application of HFNC did not demonstrate a significant increase in pressure when compared to low-flow oxygen delivered by nasal cannula.

3. Applications in the pediatric ICU

3.1. Bronchiolitis

By far, the most studied indication for the use of HFNC in the pediatric population has been in infants with bronchiolitis. This is largely due to viral bronchiolitis being a major indica­ tion for pediatric admissions with up to 25% of patients requiring admission to the PICU [34,35].

A single-center retrospective study found that the use of HFNC in infants with bronchiolitis increased from 13% to 66% over a 5-year study period. During that same period, the rate of intubation for this population decreased from 37% to 7% [36]. One-quarter of infants who received HFNC required esca­ lation to a noninvasive ventilation modality. These HFNC nonresponders failed to show improvement in heart rate and respiratory rate, while HFNC responders demonstrated a 20% reduction in heart rate and respiratory rate within 90 minutes of the start of therapy [36]. Similarly, in a separate retrospec­ tive study, McKiernan and colleagues showed that after the introduction of HFNC to their PICU, there was a reduction in rates of intubation and PICU length of stay [37]. Before the introduction of HFNC, the predominant support modality was simple nasal cannula.

Metge and colleagues performed a retrospective study of infants with bronchiolitis during two consecutive seasons of bronchiolitis [38]. During the first season, the primary mode of respiratory support was continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). HFNC was used during the second season. While both modalities showed improvements in heart rate and respiratory rate over time, there were no differences observed when comparing the two modalities over the two seasons. In addi­ tion, the PICU length of stay was not different. There was no comparator group during each season (i.e. standard of care or low flow nasal cannula); so, while HFNC seemed similar to CPAP in terms of patient outcomes, the overall clinical signifi­ cance is difficult to interpret.

In a large, multi-center retrospective database study, Clayton and colleagues evaluated the use of noninvasive ven­ tilation compared to HFNC in infants with acute bronchiolitis [39]. Compared with noninvasive ventilation, initial use with HFNC was associated with a reduced need for intubation (11.0% vs. 20.1%), reduced PICU length of stay (2.8 days vs. 3.7 days), and reduced mortality (0.2% vs. 1.1%). Infants who received HFNC and then subsequently required noninvasive ventilation had similar rates of intubation compared to patients initially receiving noninvasive positive pressure venti­ lation. This retrospective database study was not able to determine risk factors of HFNC failure [39].

[DOCLING_PAGE 4]

EXPERT REVIEW OF RESPIRATORY MEDICINE

411

In a prospective interventional trial, Ergul and colleagues randomized 60 infants with moderate-to-severe bronchiolitis into groups receiving oxygen via Oxymask or at least 1 L/kg/ min HFNC [40]. The primary outcome was treatment failure, which was defined as the need for escalation of care. There were no treatment failures in the HFNC group, whereas 23% of infants were deemed treatment failures in the Oxymask group. In addition, PICU length of stay, hospital length of stay, and time to weaning from supplemental oxygen were all signifi­ cantly shorter in patients randomized to receive HFNC. Furthermore, improvements in respiratory rate and heart rate were greater in the HFNC group.

In a pilot RCT, Cesar and colleagues randomized 63 infants with bronchiolitis to receive CPAP or HFNC [41]. Treatment failure, defined as the need for escalation of BiPAP or intuba­ tion, was similar in both groups. PICU length of stay was also the same, suggesting equivalence of the two modalities.

In the TRAMONTANE study, Milési and colleagues con­ ducted a multi-center, randomized controlled trial comparing nasal CPAP and HFNC in patients with severe bronchiolitis [42]. The primary outcome was treatment failure, defined as an increase in the modified Woods clinical asthma score, increase in respiratory rate, increase in the EDIN pain/comfort scale [43], and/or more than two episodes of severe apneas. While the HFNC group experienced more treatment failures (50.7% vs. 31.0%), there were no clinical differences in intuba­ tion rates or PICU length of stay compared to nasal CPAP. In addition, total duration of noninvasive respiratory support was not different between the two groups.

In the follow-up TRAMONTANE-2 study, Milési, et al. exam­ ined two flow rates, 2 L/kg/min versus 3 L/kg/min [20]. Treatment failure and intubation rates were the same in both groups (38.7% vs. 38.9%); however, infants treated with 3 L/kg/min were more likely to fail due to patient discomfort and had longer PICU length of stays. Interestingly, the treat­ ment failure rate for the HFNC groups in TRAMONTANE-2 was markedly reduced compared to TRAMONTANE and similar to the CPAP failure rate in the original study. This difference is unlikely to be the result of a change in disease severity but instead is likely secondary to increased clinician expertise with the use of HFNC, gained over the 2 years between study cohorts.

The literature would suggest that the provision of HFNC to infants with viral bronchiolitis is both safe and effective at reducing intubation rates when compared to standard nasal cannula. When compared to noninvasive ventilation modal­ ities, HFNC appears safe, with some studies supporting equiva­ lence to noninvasive ventilation [41,42], whereas others suggest an association with improved outcomes [39]. The rapid acceptance of HFNC may likely be due to the better patient tolerance of this modality when compared to nonin­ vasive positive pressure. In addition, the ease of equipment setup and application of the cannula may make HFNC the preferred respiratory treatment modality in infants with bronchiolitis.

3.2. Asthma

Positive effects of HFNC in critically ill children with asthma who initially present to the emergency department have been reported. In a retrospective study of patients admitted from the pediatric emergency department to the PICU, the intubation rate for pediatric asthma decreased from 5% to 0.6% with the imple­ mentation of a HFNC-use guideline. Despite the decrease in intubation rates, there was no change in PICU length of stay [44]. In a pilot randomized controlled trial of 62 pediatric patients with asthma, those who were randomized to HFNC were more likely to have an improvement in pulmonary score than patients receiving conventional oxygen therapy [45]. Secondary out­ comes did not reveal any differences in PICU length of stay, general ward length of stay, or emergency department dis­ charges. No patients in either group required intubation. However, given the small sample size, conclusions regarding secondary outcomes are likely underpowered.

An observational cohort study of one PICU examined 620 patients who were managed with HFNC during their PICU admission [46]. The most common indication for the use of HFNC was for patients with status asthmaticus at 27% (n = 171), with patients diagnosed with status asthmaticus and pneumonia comprising an additional 14% (n = 85). Few patients in this cohort required escalation to noninvasive ven­ tilation (5.6%) or intubation (4.5%). Of the 171 patients with status asthmaticus treated with HFNC, only 3 (1.7%) required escalation to noninvasive ventilation, and none required intu­ bation. This study also compared a cohort before and after the implementation of HFNC in the PICU and study showed no significant difference in PICU length of stay [46].

A separate retrospective study examined clinical differences in patients with critical asthma treated with HFNC versus noninvasive ventilation [47]. The initial support of noninvasive ventilation or HFNC was decided by the attending PICU phy­ sician and relied 'solely on the physician's self-confidence with the technique.' In the 22 patients who received noninvasive ventilation, none required escalation to intubation and inva­ sive ventilation; whereas 8 of the 20 patients who received HFNC demonstrated failure of treatment and were rescued with noninvasive ventilation, p < 0.001. Despite not finding a difference between the two cohorts with respect to PICU length of stay, when the patients who failed HFNC were examined, it was noted that they had a threefold longer time with ventilator support and double the PICU length of stay when compared to patients receiving noninvasive venti­ lation alone. The application of HFNC in the most severe patients with asthma may delay optimal treatment if failure is not identified and treated early [47].

In a retrospective study from a French PICU, 69 critical asthma patients were included with 39 patients receiving HFNC and 30 patients receiving standard oxygen therapy [48]. The children who received HFNC were sicker as evi­ denced by higher PIM2 score and higher pCO2. These patients had double the length of stay when compared to the cohort of patients only needing conventional oxygen. This difference may be explained in some part by the higher severity of illness, although the authors did not assess this with multi­ variate models [48].

[DOCLING_PAGE 5]

412

J. A. CLAYTON ET AL.

Despite the rapid adoption of HFNC for patients with asthma, current studies do not demonstrate significant improvements in patient outcomes. For patients with more severe disease, HFNC may be a poor choice in that there was a higher incidence of treatment failure requiring rescue with noninvasive ventilation [47]. However, most studies to date are retrospective or observational cohort studies with rela­ tively small sample sizes. Studies are needed to identify risk factors for HFNC failure so that these patients can be more quickly identified, and their therapy intensified.

3.3. Aerosol delivery of medication

It has recently been observed that delivery of aerosolized medications through a HFNC system is variable. In an animal model using scintigraphy to evaluate aerosolized drug deposi­ tion, Réminiac and colleagues demonstrated that a mesh nebulizer placed in a HFNC circuit deposited a similar amount of drug as the standard jet nebulizer and face mask. This was only true at low flow rates of 2 L/min and 4 L/min. At higher flow rates, up to 8 L/min, drug deposition was significantly reduced [49]. Similarly, using a pediatric lung manikin, Moody and colleagues demonstrated that the optimal flow for drug deposition was 3 L/min. For delivery of continuous albuterol, a vibrating mesh nebulizer delivered more drugs than a jet nebulizer [50].

An in vitro study evaluated aerosolized dose delivery using a range of cannula sizes and flow rates. Perry and colleagues demonstrated an inverse relationship between flow rate and nebulized dose delivery. Also, more drugs were delivered with a larger cannula size [51].

The use of the HFNC interface may have important effects on delivering aerosolized medications. In a randomized crossover study comparing standard jet nebulization with a mask to a vibrating mesh nebulizer in-line with HFNC, the authors found improved comfort scores with the use of the mesh nebulizer and HFNC. They postulate this difference was due in part to better tolerance of the cannula versus the face mask as well as fewer disruptions to the patients' sleep or other activities with the integrated mesh nebulizer/HFNC apparatus [52]. This study did not evaluate patient outcomes; so, the overall effectiveness of aerosol delivery with HFNC cannot be determined.

While conditioned gas delivery may lessen the amount of bronchoreactivity in patients with asthma, the poor delivery of nebulized albuterol may negate the theoretical positive effects of HFNC. Manufacturers of HFNC devices are also redesigning delivery devices to improve on aerosolized drug delivery.

3.4. Pneumonia/Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure

A retrospective study conducted over a 3-year period in a PICU showed 40% of patients treated with HFNC as a primary respiratory treatment modality were diagnosed with pneumo­ nia. Overall, in this heterogeneous population, the use of HFNC was associated with improved heart rate, respiratory rate, and SpO2/FiO2 amongst the entire cohort. Predictors of HFNC failure included higher initial FiO2 and lower SpO2/FiO2. The authors did not evaluate separate disease subgroups with respect to changes in SpO2/FiO2 or vital signs, as such it cannot be determined if these population effects are general­ izable to children with pneumonia [53].

In a single-center RCT in India, children and infants admitted with acute respiratory distress were randomized to receive HFNC or conventional oxygen therapy [54]. Pneumonia was the primary diagnosis in 73% of the patients. Treatment failure was defined as not having achieved two or more of the following criteria: respiratory rate reduction by 20%; heart rate reduction by 20%; and FiO2 < 0.5. The odds of treatment failure were 85% lower in patients receiving HFNC compared to those with conventional oxygen therapy. Children with HFNC also had greater improvement in clinical variables, such as respiratory rate and heart rate. Intubation rates, hospital, and ICU length of stay were not examined in this study [54].

In a single-center trial in China, children under 2 years of age with pneumonia were recruited in an emergency ward and randomized to receive HFNC or CPAP [55]. Treatment failure was defined as SpO2 less than 92% and persistent tachycardia and tachypnea after 1 hour of therapy. These patients were subsequently intubated and transferred to a PICU. There was no difference in treatment failure rates between the two groups: HFNC 14% versus CPAP 10%. Hospital length of stay was also similar in both groups. In designing their study, the authors presumed a failure rate of 30% for infants receiving CPAP and 50% for infants on HFNC. This assumption was made based on a study of CPAP versus HFNC in infants with bronchiolitis (TRAMONTANE). Given the large difference in treatment failure rates observed in this study, it is likely that it was underpowered to detect noninferiority as it was originally designed [55].

Chisti and colleagues randomized 225 children with severe pneumonia and hypoxemia to three groups: bubble CPAP, low-flow nasal cannula, and high-flow nasal cannula [56]. Primary outcome was treatment failure defined as two or more of the following: severe hypoxemia (SpO2 < 85%) after 30 minutes of study therapy, signs of severe respiratory dis­ tress, and capillary pCO 2 greater than 60 mmHg and pH less than 7.2. There were fewer treatment failures and decreased mortality in the group that received bubble CPAP compared to low-flow nasal cannula. No differences in treatment failure were seen when comparing bubble CPAP to HFNC. The study was stopped prematurely because of the increased mortality in the low-flow oxygen group. It is, therefore, not clear if the absence of differences between CPAP and HFNC is true given the underpowered nature of the study.

Some of the children in the above studies may be categor­ ized as having pediatric ARDS (PARDS), although this informa­ tion was not clearly defined in the above reports. The absence of measurable and consistently applied positive pressure in patients with HFNC precludes its study in patients with PARDS. Recent consensus guidelines from the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury Consensus Conference Group (PALICC) offered a definition for a group of patients 'at risk' for PARDS that includes those receiving supplemental oxygen via face mask, regular nasal cannula, and HFNC [57]. Future studies are needed in this group of patients on HFNC to define appro­ priate flow-rates, fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2), risk factors for progression of disease, and factors associated with improvement.

[DOCLING_PAGE 6]

EXPERT REVIEW OF RESPIRATORY MEDICINE

413

This small series of pediatric randomized controlled trials demonstrates that HFNC can improve physiologic variables in children with pneumonia. Outcomes were similar to patients receiving noninvasive positive pressure suggesting therapeu­ tic equivalence. This is supported by the landmark study in critically ill adults by Frat and colleagues. However, while Frat showed a mortality benefit in patients treated with HFNC, this has not been shown in pediatric patients [58]. Larger studies in children are needed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of HFNC in pediatric pneumonia.

3.5. Post-extubation respiratory distress

Several adult studies have demonstrated reduced reintubation rates when low-risk patients were extubated to HFNC rather than conventional oxygen therapy [13,14] and non-inferiority in high-risk patients extubated to HFNC compared to nonin­ vasive ventilation [12]. A recent meta-analysis confirmed HFNC was non-inferior to noninvasive ventilation in the rate of reintubation and treatment failure [15]. A meta-analysis of preterm newborns showed that extubation to HFNC is not inferior to CPAP [59]. Despite strong evidence in adults and neonates, data in pediatrics are scarce.

A population that is of particular interest are infants who have undergone cardiac surgery. A small physiologic study of 10 infants extubated to HFNC was performed measuring thor­ aco-abdominal synchrony using respiratory inductive plethys­ mography. The authors demonstrated improved thoracoabdominal synchrony with flows of 2 L/kg/min compared to 1 L/kg/min [60]. In another study, pediatric cardiac surgical patients under 18 months of age were randomized to receive HFNC or conventional oxygen after extubation. While the authors did not find any difference in their primary endpoint (pCO2), they were able to demonstrate improvement in PaO2 and PaO2/FiO2 ratio in the patients extubated to HFNC com­ pared to conventional oxygen therapy. The rate of reintuba­ tion, however, did not differ between the two groups [61]. A small prospective observational study examined 20 children who underwent cardiac surgery and were extubated to HFNC. The study showed improvements in respiratory rate but no changes in SpO2, pCO2, heart rate, or lactate. Unfortunately, there was no control group for comparison; so, interpretation of these data is limited [62]. This same group is currently enrolling infants in whom cardiac surgery is planned to eval­ uate for post-extubation pulmonary complications in infants extubated to HFNC [63]. A retrospective study of infants after congenital heart surgery and cardiopulmonary bypass exam­ ined the effect of extubation to HFNC or positive airway pressure. In this propensity-matched analysis, the authors showed that extubation to positive airway pressure was not superior to HFNC with respect to extubation failure. Instead, extubation to positive airway pressures was associated with higher resource utilization and longer lengths of stay [64].

In the general PICU population, an RCT by Akyıldız and colleagues randomized children to extubation to HFNC (n = 50) versus conventional nasal cannula (n = 50) [65]. There were improved physiological variables of heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, end-tidal carbon dioxide, and SpO2/FiO2. In addition, fewer patients extubated to HFNC required reintubation (n = 2, 4% vs. n = 11, 22%). In the multicenter pilot RCT, FIRST-ABC, critically ill children were randomized to receive HFNC or CPAP [66]. One arm of the study evaluated the two modalities in recently extubated children. There were no differences in reintubation within 72 hours, PICU length of stay, hospital length of stay, or mortality. It is important to note that this was a pilot study and was, thus, likely to be underpowered to detect significant differences. Nonetheless, this manuscript does provide evi­ dence for further study in larger randomized trials that are currently ongoing [66].

The efficacy of HFNC in post-extubation respiratory failure has not been equivocally demonstrated in these small trials. Extubation to HFNC seems to improve some physiological variables in children. What these studies are lacking are vari­ ables that identify patients who are at risk of failure postextubation. The initial indications for intubation, duration of mechanical ventilation, level of sedation, and vital signs may predict failure or success of extubation to HFNC. Studies are needed to identify these markers and then design RCTs with a better-defined population. In addition, there are likely addi­ tional costs accrued if clinicians broadly treat patients with HFNC when it is likely that many patients may not need it.

3.6. Pediatric transport

Children with respiratory distress or impending respiratory failure present a unique challenge in transporting from one facility to another. The principles of basic resuscitation neces­ sitate the maintenance of an adequate airway. At times, elec­ tive endotracheal intubation is preferred given the risk of respiratory compromise during transport. Given the potential complications of intubation and invasive ventilation, other modalities such as noninvasive ventilation and HFNC are being evaluated as alternative treatment systems during interhospital transport. Transporting a patient with HFNC can be complicated. The heater and humidifier require a source of power and stable platform to ensure the system remains upright. In addition, it is conceivable, especially in larger patients requiring higher flows of gas, that ambulances may not have an adequate supply of oxygen or compressed air. Schlapbach and colleagues reviewed 793 infant transport cases and found a reduction in intubation and noninvasive ventilation corresponding to the added use of HFNC [67]. Importantly, the intubation rate during the first 24 hours of PICU admission did not change after the implementation and use of HFNC in the transport process.

Intra-hospital transport of critically ill children is associated with adverse events including, hypoxemia, bradycardia, tachy­ cardia, respiratory distress, hypotension, and cardiopulmonary arrest [68,69]. Children in the PICU are frequently transferred to and from the operating room, imaging suites, from the emergency department or general pediatric wards. Efforts to mitigate adverse events are important. Currently, there are no pediatric studies evaluating the use of HFNC in intra-hospital transport of critically ill children.

[DOCLING_PAGE 7]

414

J. A. CLAYTON ET AL.

4. Conclusion

The use of HFNC has gained wide acceptance in PICUs in the treatment of children with acute respiratory illness. This is largely due to the perceived comfort to the patient and ease of use. In addition, many observational studies have demon­ strated benefits in physiological variables, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and SpO2. Other clinical outcomes, such as ICU and hospital length of stay, intubation rate, and mortality have shown modest improvements with HFNC or no differ­ ences when compared to standard oxygen therapy or nonin­ vasive ventilation. Given the heterogeneity of pediatric respiratory illnesses, larger prospective studies examining homogeneous populations are needed to prove clinical bene­ fit beyond vital sign improvement.

5. Expert opinion

The rapid adoption of HFNC for pediatric patients has largely been driven by small observational studies that have been generally consistent in showing a therapeutic benefit with respect to vital signs and clinical measures of the patient's work of breathing. However, with respect to patient-centered outcomes, such as intubation rates, mortality, or hospital length of stay, many studies were underpowered to detect a difference or show, at best, only modest improvements in clinical outcome. In addition, the perception that patient com­ fort is better with HFNC may cause providers to readily adopt this modality despite the lack of robust prospective clinical trials.

There is wide variability in practice with respect to flow settings and disease indications [70]. There are also a lack of studies evaluating indications for initiating, escalating, and weaning of HFNC therapy. While clinical guidelines have been associated with improved outcomes in the emergency department [44], no such studies exist in the PICU setting. The expansion of the use of HFNC on general wards and emergency departments, while apparently safe, may para­ doxically increase unnecessary usage [71,72], be more costly, and increase the risk of rare but catastrophic events [73], although additional investigations are needed. Without clear guidelines and protocols, it is conceivable that some chil­ dren are being over-treated in the hospital and length of stays (PICU and hospital) may be unnecessarily prolonged as we do not clearly understand the pertinent markers of improvement. Conversely, it is plausible that we are undertreating some children by using HFNC and potentially dan­ gerously delaying more definitive treatment. In addition, the use of HFNC on sick children on the general pediatric wards may delay timely transfer to the PICU, which may be asso­ ciated with adverse outcomes. Vital sign markers, heart rate and respiratory rate, have been identified as potential iden­ tifiers of HFNC responders [74]. Additional physiological or biochemical markers of response will be helpful to focus HFNC use in the optimal patients as well as avoid delays of more definitive treatment in HFNC non-responders.

Ideally, large multicenter randomized controlled trials examining HFNC in a variety of pediatric diseases are needed to conclusively prove the benefit(s) of HFNC. However, given the wide acceptance that already exists, designing such trials may be difficult because of the perceived lack of equipoise. Furthermore, deciding the appropriate comparator group is also difficult as the perception has been that HFNC is better than conventional oxygen and worse or equivalent to nonin­ vasive ventilation. Given the relatively low mortality of pedia­ tric respiratory diseases, studying such outcomes would require a very large number of patients across multiple sites, making recruitment of subjects likely impractical.

Despite these difficulties, it is important to continue research in this burgeoning field. Interpretation of earlier stu­ dies was often hampered by varying definitions of high flow and variable use of flow settings. Recent work has established that flows of 1-2 L/kg/min may be sufficient to treat many cases of acute bronchiolitis [20,42]. It is not yet understood if these same flow ranges are effective for pediatric pneumonia or asthma. With respect to asthma, in vitro studies have demonstrated variable nebulized drug deposition. Further research is needed in this area to optimize drug delivery.

The definition of PARDS requires the presence of CPAP greater than or equal to 5 cm H2O, thus precluding trials including HFNC. However, patients who are at risk of PARDS (i.e. meeting all the criteria except for the requirement of positive pressure) are a particularly interesting population that requires study. Traditionally, the optimal treatment is invasive mechanical ventilation with high PEEP and low tidal volume. Recent work in adults suggests that HFNC may be a modality that prevents patients at risk for ARDS from need­ ing intubation and may also reduce mortality [58]. Trials are needed in children who are at risk from PARDS to identify the safety and utility of HFNC in this group. Inevitably, some children would fail HFNC therapy and require invasive ventila­ tion. Studies identifying risk factors for failure are critically important.

Another avenue of research is through quality improve­ ment initiatives. If large multicenter studies are not feasible, then single-center quality improvement projects may be able to augment the growing literature. Charvat and colleagues enacted a multidisciplinary quality initiative over 3 years in infants with bronchiolitis treated with HFNC [75]. Through the implementation of an evidence-based weaning protocol, they were able to decrease HFNC length of treatment by 17 hours and hospital length of stay by 23 hours. During this period, there were no increases in PICU transfers or readmission rates after discharge.

While patient comfort and ease of use are important rea­ sons to choose a particular treatment modality, it may not promote optimal patient outcomes if those are the only rea­ sons. Currently, robust evidence of the efficacy of HFNC in treating the variety of pediatric critical illness is lacking. Some gains have been made, but much work remains to be done.

Declaration of interests

The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

[DOCLING_PAGE 8]

EXPERT REVIEW OF RESPIRATORY MEDICINE

415

Reviewer disclosures

Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.

References

Shoemaker MT, Pierce MR, Yoder BA, et al. High flow nasal cannula versus nasal CPAP for neonatal respiratory disease: a retrospective study. J Perinatol. 2007;27(2):85-91. Papers of special note have been highlighted as (*) of interest or (**) of considerable interest

Sreenan C, Lemke RP, Hudson-Mason A, et al. High-flow nasal cannulae in the management of apnea of prematurity: a comparison with conventional nasal continuous positive airway pressure. PEDIATRICS. 2001;107(5):1081-1083.

Holleman-Duray D, Kaupie D, and Weiss MG. Heated humidified high-flow nasal cannula: use and a neonatal early extubation protocol. J Perinatol. 2007;27(12) ;776-781.

Kubicka ZJ, Limauro J, Darnall RA. Heated, humidified high-flow nasal cannula therapy: yet another way to deliver continuous positive airway pressure? PEDIATRICS. 2008;29(4):121.

Lampland AL, Plumm B, and Meyers PA, et al. Observational study of humidified high-flow nasal cannula compared with nasal con­ tinuous positive airway pressure. J Pediatr. 2009 154 2 ;177-182.

Chatila W, Nugent T, and Vance G, et al. The effects of high-flow vs low-flow oxygen on exercise in advanced obstructive airways disease. Chest. 2004;126(4) ;1108-1115.

Nilius G, Franke K-J, Domanski U, et al. Effects of nasal insufflation on arterial gas exchange and breathing pattern in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypercapnic respiratory failure. 2013.

Price AM, Plowright C, and Makowski A, et al. Using a high-flow respiratory system (Vapotherm ® ) within a high dependency set­ ting. Nurs Crit Care. 2008;13(6) ;298-304.

Roca O, Riera J, Torres F, et al. High-flow oxygen therapy in acute respiratory failure. Respir Care. 2010;55(4):408.

Parke RL, McGuinness SP, and Eccleston ML. A preliminary rando­ mized controlled trial to assess effectiveness of nasal high-flow oxygen in intensive care patients. Respir Care. 2011;56(3);265-270.

Sztrymf B, Messika J, and Mayot T, et al. Impact of high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy on intensive care unit patients with acute respiratory failure: a prospective observational study. J Crit Care. 2012;27(3) ;e9-e13.

Hernández G, Vaquero C, Colinas L, et al. Effect of postextubation high-flow nasal cannula vs noninvasive ventilation on reintubation and postextubation respiratory failure in high-risk patients. JAMA. 2016;316(15):1565.

Hernández G, Vaquero C, González P, et al. Effect of postextubation high-flow nasal cannula vs conventional oxygen therapy on reintu­ bation in low-risk patients. JAMA. 2016;315(13):1354.

Maggiore SM, Idone FA, Vaschetto R, et al. Nasal high-flow versus venturi mask oxygen therapy after extubation. effects on oxygena­ tion, comfort, and clinical outcome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014;190(3):282-288.

Guo K, Liu G, Wang W, et al. Effects of high-flow nasal oxygen cannula versus other noninvasive ventilation in extubated patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2021;16(1):109-119.

Ward JJ. High-flow oxygen administration by nasal cannula for adult and perinatal patients. Respir Care. 2013;58(1) ;98-122.

Lee JH, Rehder KJ, and Williford L, et al. Use of high flow nasal cannula in critically ill infants, children, and adults: a critical review of the literature. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39(2) ;247-257.

Beggs S, Wong ZH, Kaul S, et al. High-flow nasal cannula therapy for infants with bronchiolitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014. DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD009609.pub2.

Mayfield S, Jauncey-Cooke J, and Hough JL, et al. High-flow nasal cannula therapy for respiratory support in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;3.

Milési C, Pierre A-F, Deho A, et al., A multicenter randomized controlled trial of a 3-L/kg/min versus 2-L/kg/min high-flow nasal cannula flow rate in young infants with severe viral bronchiolitis (TRAMONTANE 2). Intensive Care Med. 2018;44(11): 1870-1878.

·· This RCT compared two flow rates and found similar levels of treatment failure, but improved PICU LOS and improved com­ fort in patients receiving 2 L/kg/min.

Slain KN, Shein SL, Rotta AT. The use of high-flow nasal cannula in the pediatric emergency department. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2017;94 (1):93.

Milési C, Requirand A, Douillard A, et al. Assessment of peak inspiratory flow in young infants with acute viral bronchiolitis: physiological basis for initial flow setting in patients supported with high-flow nasal cannula. J Pediatr. 2021;231:239-245.e1.

Milési C, Boubal M, Jacquot A, et al. High-flow nasal cannula: recommendations for daily practice in pediatrics. Ann Intensive Care. 2014;4(1). DOI:10.1186/s13613-014-0029-5.

Dysart K, Miller TL, Wolfson MR, et al., Research in high flow therapy: mechanisms of action. Respir Med. 2009;103(10): 1400-1405.

In-depth review on the proposed mechanisms of HFNC.

Möller W, Feng S, and Domanski U, et al. Nasal high flow reduces dead space. J Appl Physiol. 2017;122(1): ;191-197.

Rubin S, Ghuman A, Deakers T, et al. Effort of breathing in children receiving high-flow nasal cannula. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15 (1):15.

Weiler T, Kamerkar A, and Hotz J, et al. The relationship between high flow nasal cannula flow rate and effort of breathing in children. J Pediatr. 2017;189 :66-71.

Milési C, Baleine J, and Matecki S, et al. Is treatment with a high flow nasal cannula effective in acute viral bronchiolitis? A physiologic study. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39(6): 1088-1094.

Pham TMT, O'Malley L, and Mayfield S, et al. The effect of high flow nasal cannula therapy on the work of breathing in infants with bronchiolitis. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015;50(7): ;713-720.

Fontanari P, Burnet H, and Zattara-Hartmann MC, et al. Changes in airway resistance induced by nasal inhalation of cold dry, dry, or moist air in normal individuals. J Appl Physiol. 1996;81(4): 17391743.

Ingaramo OA, Ngo TMT, Khemani RG. Impact of positive endexpiratory pressure on cardiac index measured by ultrasound car­ diac output monitor*. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15(1):15.

Spentzas T, Minarik M, and Patters AB, et al. Children with respira­ tory distress treated with high-flow nasal cannula. J Intensive Care Med. 2009;24(5) :323-328.

Arora B, Mahajan P, and Zidan MA, et al. Nasopharyngeal airway pressures in bronchiolitis patients treated with high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(11) ;11791184.

Wang EEL, Law BJ, and Stephens D. Pediatric Investigators Collaborative Network on Infections in Canada (PICNIC) prospec­ tive study of risk factors and outcomes in patients hospitalized with respiratory syncytial viral lower respiratory tract infection. J Pediatr. 1995;126(2) ;212-219.

Gupta P, Beam BW, Rettiganti M. Temporal trends of respiratory syncytial virus-associated hospital and ICU admissions across the United States. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2016;17(8):e343-e351.

Schibler A, Pham TMT, and Dunster KR, et al. Reduced intubation rates for infants after introduction of high-flow nasal prong oxygen delivery. Intensive Care Med. 2011;37(5):847-852.

McKiernan C, Chua LC, and Visintainer PF, et al. High flow nasal cannulae therapy in infants with bronchiolitis. J Pediatr. 2010;156 (4):634-638.

Metge P, Grimaldi C, Hassid S, et al. Comparison of a high-flow humidified nasal cannula to nasal continuous positive airway pres­ sure in children with acute bronchiolitis: experience in a pediatric intensive care unit. Eur J Pediatr. 2014:173. DOI:10.1007/s00431013-2142-0

Clayton JA, McKee B, Slain KN, et al., Outcomes of children with bronchiolitis treated with high-flow nasal cannula or noninvasive

[DOCLING_PAGE 9]

416

J. A. CLAYTON ET AL.

positive pressure ventilation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2019;20(2): 128-135.

·· This large retrospective database study showed an association with reduced intubation rate and reduced PICU LOS in patients receiving HFNC.

Ergul AB, Calıskan E, and Samsa H, et al. Using a high-flow nasal cannula provides superior results to OxyMask delivery in moderate to severe bronchiolitis: a randomized controlled study. Eur J Pediatr. 2018;177(8):1299-1307.

Cesar RG, Bispo BRP, and Felix PHCA, et al. High-flow nasal cannula versus continuous positive airway pressure in critical bronchiolitis: a randomized controlled pilot. J Pediatr Intensive Care. 2020;9(4):;248-255.

Milési C, Essouri S, and Pouyau R, et al. High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) versus nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) for the initial respiratory management of acute viral bronchiolitis in young infants: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (TRAMONTANE study). Intensive Care Med. 2017;43(2):209-216.

·· This RCT found higher rates of treatment failure in patient receiving HFNC vs. CPAP. However, intubation rates and PICU LOS were similar.

Debillon T, Zupan V, and Ravault N, et al. Development and initial validation of the EDIN scale, a new tool for assessing prolonged pain in preterm infants. Arch Dis Child. 2001;85(1): F36-F41.

Wing R, James C, and Maranda LS, et al. Use of high-flow nasal cannula support in the emergency department reduces the need for intubation in pediatric acute respiratory insufficiency. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(11) :1117-1123.

Ballestero Y, de Pedro J, Portillo N, et al. Pilot clinical trial of high-flow oxygen therapy in children with asthma in the emer­ gency service. J Pediatr. 2018;194:204-210.e3.

Coletti KD, Bagdure DN, Walker LK, et al. High-flow nasal can­ nula utilization in pediatric critical care. Respir Care. 2017;63 (1):62.

Pilar J, Modesto I Alapont V, Lopez-Fernandez YM, et al. High-flow nasal cannula therapy versus non-invasive ventilation in children with severe acute asthma exacerbation: an observational cohort study. Med Intensiva. 2017;41(1):41.

Baudin F, Buisson A, Vanel B, et al. Nasal high flow in manage­ ment of children with status asthmaticus: a retrospective observa­ tional study. Ann Intensive Care. 2017;7(1). DOI:10.1186/s13613017-0278-1.

Réminiac F, Vecellio L, and Mac LR, et al. Nasal high flow nebuliza­ tion in infants and toddlers: an in vitro and in vivo scintigraphic study. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2017;52(3) :337-344.

Moody GB, and Ari A. Quantifying continuous nebulization via high flow nasal cannula and large volume nebulizer in a pediatric model. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2020; 55(10):2596-2602.

Perry SA, Kesser KC, and Geller DE, et al. Influences of cannula size and flow rate on aerosol drug delivery through the vapotherm humidified high-flow nasal cannula system. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2013;14(5) ;e250-e256.

Valencia-Ramos J, Mirás A, Cilla A, et al. Incorporating a nebulizer system into high-flow nasal cannula improves comfort in infants with bronchiolitis. Respir Care. 2018;64(1):63.

Chang -C-C, Lin Y-C, Chen T-C, et al. High-flow nasal cannula therapy in children with acute respiratory distress with hypoxia in a pediatric intensive care unit-a single center experience. Front Pediatr. 2021;9. DOI:10.3389/fped.2021.664180.

Sitthikarnkha P, Samransamruajkit R, and Prapphal N, et al. High-flow nasal cannula versus conventional oxygen therapy in children with respiratory distress. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2018;22(5): 321-325.

Liu C, Cheng WY, Li JS, et al. High-Flow nasal cannula vs. contin­ uous positive airway pressure therapy for the treatment of children <2 Years With Mild to Moderate Respiratory Failure Due to Pneumonia. Front Pediatr. 2020;8:8.

Chisti MJ, Salam MA, Smith JH, et al., Bubble continuous positive airway pressure for children with severe pneumonia and

hypoxaemia in Bangladesh: an open, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;386(9998): 1057-1065.

This RCT compared CPAP and HFNC in pediatric patients with pneumonia. There was no difference in treatment failure between the two groups, but each showed a mortality benefit when compared to low-flow NC.

Pediatric Acute Lung Injury Consensus Conference Group, Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2015;16(5): 428-439.

·· Consensus guidelines on PARDS from The Pediatric Acute Lung Injury Consensus Conference Group (PALICC)

Frat J-P, Thille AW, Mercat A, et al. High-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. N Engl J Med. 2015:372.

·· This RCT in adults with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure demonstrated no difference in intubation rates in patients receiving HFNC vs. non-invasive ventilation. There was a mortality benefit seen in patients randomized to HFNC

Colleti Junior J, D. Azevedo R, Araujo O, et al. High-flow nasal cannula as a post-extubation respiratory support strategy in pre­ term infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2020;96(4):422-431.

Itagaki T, Nakanishi N, Okuda N, et al. Effect of high-flow nasal cannula on thoraco-abdominal synchrony in pediatric subjects after cardiac surgery. Respir Care. 2019;64.

Testa G, Iodice F, Ricci Z, et al. Comparative evaluation of high-flow nasal cannula and conventional oxygen therapy in paediatric car­ diac surgical patients: a randomized controlled trial. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2014;19(3):456-461.

Shioji N, Iwasaki T, and Kanazawa T, et al. Physiological impact of high-flow nasal cannula therapy on postextubation acute respira­ tory failure after pediatric cardiac surgery: a prospective observa­ tional study. J Intensive Care. 2017;5(1):35 .

Shioji N, Kanazawa T, Iwasaki T, et al. Incidence of Pulmonary Complications with the Prophylactic Use of High-flow Nasal Cannula after Pediatric Cardiac Surgery: prophylactic HFNC Study Protocol. Acta Med Okayama. 2018;72(2):193-196.

Richter RP, Alten JA, King RW, et al. Positive airway pressure versus high-flow nasal cannula for prevention of extubation failure in infants after congenital heart surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2019;20.

Akyıldız B, Öztürk S, Ülgen-Tekerek N, et al. Comparison between high-flow nasal oxygen cannula and conventional oxygen therapy after extubation in pediatric intensive care unit. Turk J Pediatr. 2018;60.

Hosey MM, Jaskulski J, Wegener T, et al. Animal-assisted interven­ tion in the ICU: a tool for humanization. Critical Care (London, England). 2018;22(1):22.

Schlapbach LJ, Schaefer J, Brady A-M, et al. High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) support in interhospital transport of critically ill children. Intensive Care Med. 2014;40.

Wallen E, Venkataraman ST, Grosso MJ, et al. Intrahospital transport of critically ill pediatric patients. Crit Care Med. 1995;23.

Haydar B, Baetzel A, Stewart M, et al. Complications associated with the anesthesia transport of pediatric patients: an analysis of the wake up safe database. Anesthesia Analg. 2020;131.

Kawaguchi A, Garros D, Joffe A, et al. Variation in practice related to the use of high flow nasal cannula in critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2020 21;21(5):e228-e235.

This international survey of pediatric critical care physicians demonstrated practice variations with respect to disease indi­ cations, initial flow rates, weaning strategy, and clinical prac­ tice markers used.

Riese J, Porter T, Fierce J, et al. Clinical outcomes of bronchiolitis after implementation of a general ward high flow nasal cannula guideline. Hosp Pediatr. 2017;7(4):197-203.

Coon ER, Stoddard G, Brady PW. Intensive care unit utilization after adoption of a ward-based high-flow nasal cannula protocol. J Hosp Med. 2020;15.

[DOCLING_PAGE 10]

EXPERT REVIEW OF RESPIRATORY MEDICINE

417

Betters KA, Gillespie SE, Miller J, et al. High flow nasal cannula use outside of the ICU; factors associated with failure. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2017;52.

Sochet AA, Nunez M, and Maamari M, et al. Physiometric response to high-flow nasal cannula support in acute bronchiolitis. Hosp Pediatr. 2021;11(1) :94-99.

Charvat C, Jain S, Orenstein EW, et al., Quality initiative to reduce high-flow nasal cannula duration and length of stay in bronchiolitis. Hosp Pediatr. 2021;11(4): 309-318.

Using Quality Improvement methodology, this study demon­ strated a reduction of length of treatment and PICU LOS with no increase in PICU transfers or readmission rates.
