[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

S58

J O U R N A L O F T H E A M E R I C A N C O L L E G E OF C A R D I O L O G Y , V O L . 6 9 , N O . 1 6 , S U P P L S , 2 0 1 7

TCTAP A-103

Brachial Access for Uterine Fibroid Embolization as an Alternative to Hysterectomia

Tasheva Iveta, 1 Ivo Petrov, 2 Zoran Stankov, 2 Silvia Alexandrova Pavlova, 2 Galina Georgieva Kozareva 2 1 University hospital, Bulgaria; 2 City Clinic, Bulgaria

BACKGROUND The aim of our study was to evaluate the ef fi ciency and safety of a minimally invasive procedure for treating uterine fi broids trough brachial access. The early and medium-term (5 years) results in recent studies show that uterine embolization is as effective as surgery (hysterectomy or myomectomy) for symptom control and quality of life improvement.

METHODS The group of patients includes 20 women with an average age of 23.9 years (interval between 31 and 47 years) with a period of follow-up between 6 and 12 months. All patients are referred by a gynecologist with proven multiple or single intramural fi broids. They present with symptomatic uterine fi broids (abnormal vaginal bleeding, abnormal menstrual pain, or abnormal pelvic pain), despite optimal medical treatment. Before and after the intervention, all patients underwent a CT of the abdomen and pelvis or MRI for better visualization of size, number, and location of the fi broids. In all patients, a 5 Fr left brachial access was used. The embolization of both uterine arteries was done with microparticles of size between 700-900 m m. Follow up was done respectively on 1st, 3rd, 6th and 12th month with veri fi cation visits by a gynecologist with ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis, comparing the size of the fi broids and uterus volume. MRI was performed on the 6 th month.

RESULTS The results demonstrate high fi broid devascularization and volume reduction rates, improvement of hypermenorrhea and dysmenorrhea. The initial average diameter of the fi broids was 55 mm. On the 12th month, the reduction was to 30 mm. Furthermore, the quality of life and general health status by the patients ' own assessment have increased. We did not observe serious early and late complications.

CONCLUSION The brachial approach is feasible for uterine embolization. The procedure is a safe and effective alternative to hysterectomy. The initial results of our clinical experience are encouraging.

TCTAP A-104

Gender Difference in Coronary Artery Spasm in Korean Population

Ji Young Park, 1 Byoung Geol Choi, 2 Seung-Woon Rha, 2 Se Yeon Choi, 2 Jae Kyeong Byun, 2 Cheol Ung Choi, 2 Dong Joo Oh 2

1 2 Korea University Guro

Eulji Medical Center, Korea (Republic of); Hospital, Korea (Republic of)

BACKGROUND Accumulating evidence has demonstrated the gender differences in the clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients with ischemic heart disease. However, it remains to be elucidated whether it is also similar in the case of patients with coronary artery spasm (CAS). The aim of this study is to estimate whether there are gender differences in the clinical characteristics and long-term prognosis of CAS.

METHODS A total of 10,177 patients with typical or atypical chest pain, underwent coronary angiography (CAG) at the Cardiovascular Center of Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul, South Korea between November 2004 and May 2014 were enrolled in this study. Among these, 6,430 patients with typical or atypical chest pain without signi fi cant coronary artery disease (de fi ned as having a stenosis diameter of less than 70% on the quantitative coronary angiography, QCA) underwent the intracoronary acetylcholine (Ach) provocation test. Of the total, 5,491 patients were enrolled for this study and divided into the two groups; male group (n ¼ 2,506), female group (n ¼ 2,985). We compared the rate of signi fi cant CAS, major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) and repeated CAG between the two groups.

RESULTS As compared with male patients, female patients were associated with lower incidence of Ach-induced CAS (51% vs. 62%. P < 0.01) in entire patients and most of the sub-groups, however, the incidence of ST elevation and ischemic chest pain during Ach provocation test were higher in the female gender. In both groups, old age, dyslipidemia, and myocardial bridge were independent predictors of Ach-induced CAS. However, diabetes mellitus in male group and alcohol drinkers in the female group were an independent predictor of Ach-induced CAS. Hypertension or uncontrolled blood pressure was associated with lower incidence of Ach-induced CAS within both groups. However, there were no differences in various clinical outcomes up to 5-year between the two groups except higher trend of de novo PCI in the male group. In CAS patients, in male, old age and insigni fi cant stenosis (50-70%) were independent predictors of 5-year MACE, and insigni fi cant stenosis (30-50%) and use of chronic nitrates were predictors of 5-year recurrent angina. In CAS patients, in the female, insigni fi cant stenosis (30-50%) and use of diuretics were independent predictors of 5-year MACE, and dyslipidemia, myocardial bridge and use of chronic nitrates were predictors of 5-year recurrent angina.

CONCLUSION These results indicate that there are gender differences in the angiographic and clinical parameters during the Ach provocation test and clinical outcomes up to 5 years in CAS patients, suggesting the importance of gender-speci fi c management of this particular subset of patients.

TCTAP A-105

Routine Cardiac Catheterization Is Safe in Non-fasted Patients

Yunan Li, 1 Tin Zaw Latt, 2 Christina Tan, 1 Hee Hwa Ho, 1 Paul JL Ong, 1 Timothy James Watson 1 1 Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore; 2 cardiology, Myanmar

BACKGROUND Patients undergoing cardiac catheterization have historically been kept fasted in anticipation of potential complications or need for sedation. However, cardiac catheterization is now considered extremely safe and this questions the need for mandatory fasting.

METHODS We randomly assigned patients referred for elective or in-hospital cardiac catheterization to overnight fasting (OF) or limited-fasting (LF). The OF group were told to fast from midnight as per standard practice. The LF group was allowed to eat up to 2 hours prior to the planned procedure time. Emergency procedures were excluded as were patients with SaO2 < 92% (air) at baseline and patients with prior stroke or swallowing dif fi culties.

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

J O U R N A L O F T H E A M E R I C A N C O L L E G E OF CARDIOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1 6 , S U P P L S , 2 0 1 7

S59

RESULTS 515 patients (n ¼ 266 OF, n ¼ 249 LF, outpatients 35%) were included. 257 patients underwent coronary angiography; the remainder underwent coronary angiography with ad hoc percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). More patients in the LF group requiring sedation than the OF group (6.8% vs 2.6%, p ¼ 0.04) due to anxiety or radial spasm. More patients in the OF group required fl uid bolus for hypotension (4% vs. 9.4%, p ¼ 0.02). 2 patients in the OF group reported feeling nauseous post procedure, unrelated to the use of sedatives and did not lead to complications. Resting SaO2 did not drop below 92% in any patient.

[DOCLING_TABLE rows=0 columns=0]
[/DOCLING_TABLE]

CONCLUSION Allowing patients to eat and drink up until 2 hours before cardiac catheterization appeared to be well tolerated and safe and may avoid pre-procedural hypotension. Larger cohorts need to be studied to con fi rm these preliminary fi ndings.

TCTAP A-106

Effect of Timely Salvage on the Outcome of Thrombosed Vascular Access for Hemodialysis

Dao-Ming Chen, 1 Mu-Yang Hsieh, 1 Chih-Cheng Wu 1

1 National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu Branch, Taiwan

BACKGROUND The urgency of salvage attempts on thrombosed vascular access for dialysis remains unknown. Only data from observational studies are available. We examined the effect of a timely thrombectomy approach on the outcome of vascular access for dialysis.

METHODS A retrospective before-and-after study was conducted with patients who had undergone endovascular thrombectomy. A timely thrombectomy initiative, namely salvage within 24 hours after diagnosis, was started from July 2015 in our institution. Data of thrombectomy procedures within one year before and one year after the initiative were abstracted from an prospectively-followed electronic database. The immediate and patency outcomes before and after the initiative were compared.

RESULTS During the study period, 329 patients were enrolled, including 165 patients before and 164 patients after the qualityimprovement initiative. The after-initiative group had fewer late thrombectomies than the before-initiative group (7.3% vs. 45.5%, p < 0.01). No difference in technical success rate or clinical success rate was observed. At three months, 154 out of the 329 patients had experienced recurrent access dysfunction (primary patency rate, 53.2%). The after-initiative group had higher primary patency rate than the before-initiative group (52.1% vs. 41.5%, P ¼ 0.06). After strati fi cation into native or graft accesses, the difference of patency rate was only observed in the native access group (after vs. before: 68% vs. 50%, P ¼ 0.03) but not in the graft access group (after vs. before: 50% vs. 46%, P ¼ 0.68). After adjustment for potential confounders, a timely thrombectomy initiative remained an independent predictor of patency failure for native accesses.

CONCLUSION Our results suggest that a timely thrombectomy approach within 24 hours is effective in improving patency rate of native accesses for dialysis, but not for graft accesses.

TCTAP A-107

Honey Intoxication: A Unique Cause of Sudden Cardiac Collapse

Shekhar Rajbhandari 1

1 Norvic International hospital, Nepal

BACKGROUND The honey produced by the bees fed on Rhododendron species containing grayanotoxin is known as mad honey. Grayanotoxin is found in honey obtained from the nectar of Rhododendron species growing on the mountains of the Black Sea region of Turkey and also in Japan, Nepal, Brazil, and parts of North America and Europe. Although the incidence of grayanotoxin poisoning is rare, there is concern that the number of cases per year will rise with the increasing demand for organic products. Mad honey intoxication might present with mild symptoms of cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and neurological systems or might also present with the life-threatening form with AV block and cardiovascular collapse.

METHODS In this article, we describe the summary of fi ve cases, who came to our hospital with mad honey related cardiac complications.

In last one year, fi ve cases presented in the emergency department with sudden onset of Loss of consciousness, dizziness, and shortness of breath. They felt dif fi culty after the consumption of 1-3 teaspoonful of wild honey. The honey was brought from most of the rural parts of Nepal like Khotang. Some of them brought the honey from the local market outside in Kathmandu. Some of them also came with vomiting, dizziness and loose stool. On examination, most of them had severe bradycardia and low blood pressure. No abnormalities were detected on systemic examinations. In one patient, ECG and cardiac enzymes showed features of the acute coronary syndrome, but his treadmill test done few days later was normal. All patients were managed with inj. Atropine, I/V normal saline and other supportive measures and discharged in a stable condition within one or two days.

RESULTS All patients were managed with inj. Atropine, I/V normal saline and other supportive measures and discharged in a stable condition within one or two days. Though patient was very unstable when they came to the hospital. In the beginning, we assumed that they may be having some cardiac problems so they were admitted in CCU and all the basic investigations related to the cardiac cause were done. But after taking proper history we were sure of honey intoxications. They were kept for observations and all patients were managed with inj. Atropin, I/V normal saline and other supportive measures and discharged in a stable condition within one or two days.

CONCLUSION Rhododendrons is the national fl ower of Nepal. The speci fi c species of rhododendron found in Nepal which contains the toxin is not known. Bees feeding on these rhododendrons are known to transfer the grayanotoxin to the honey they produce. Most symptoms are mild and resolve themselves without medical intervention. Signs and symptoms of grayanotoxin poisoning rarely last more than 24 hours and are usually not fatal. Some signs of mad honey poisoning include Bradycardia, Cardiac arrhythmia, Hypotension, Nausea, and Vomiting. They respond to close monitoring and appropriate supportive treatment. Normally patients recover completely with no residual damage to the heart or its conduction system. In Nepal, many patients consume local honey brought from outside the capital even at extra cost thinking that its pure and organic.

TCTAP A-108

Comparison of Procedural Time of Endomyocardial Biopsy to Jugular Vein Versus Femoral Vein Access

Yusuke Nakano, 1 Tomofumi Mizuno, 1 Kentaro Mukai, 1 Toru Niwa, 1 Hirokazu Wakabayashi, 1 Atsushi Watanabe, 1 Hirohiko Ando, 1 Hiroaki Takashima, 1 Katsuhisa Waseda, 1 Tetsuya Amano 1 1

Aichi Medical University, Japan

BACKGROUND Endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) is widely used for assessment of cardiac allograft rejection and for the diagnosis of unexplained ventricular dysfunction. EMB is usually performed through the jugular or femoral veins; however, each vascular access has advantage and disadvantage. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate procedural time obtaining specimens between jugular and femoral vein.

METHODS From February 2014 to May 2016, patients requiring EMB were prospectively enrolled in this study and EMB was performed by 3 preidenti fi ed technical experts. Vascular access either jugular or femoral vein were randomly assigned. Each case proposed to obtain 3 specimens. EMB procedural times and its related factors were analyzed.
