[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Letters to the Editor

REFERENCES

Uyar E, Yalindag-Ozturk MN: Early Antibiotic Prescription and Early Discharge: Too Good to Be True. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2019; 20:794-795

Shein SL, Kong M, McKee B, et al: Antibiotic prescription in young children with respiratory syncytial virus-associated respiratory failure and associated outcomes. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2019; 20:101-109

Shein SL, Slain K, Wilson-Costello D, et al: Temporal changes in prescription of neuropharmacologic drugs and utilization of resources related to neurologic morbidity in mechanically ventilated children with bronchiolitis. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2017; 18:e606-e6144

DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000002030

Beware the Pitfalls of Big Data

To the Editor:

A s a mentor for young researchers, I was alarmed by a recent publication in your esteemed journal. In the recent issue of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine , Clayton et al (1) published a study looking at the intubation rates in children with bronchiolitis initially placed on high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) compared with that of those initially placed on noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV). The study by Clayton et al (1), including almost 7,000 patients in the Virtual Pediatric Systems database, found that intubation rates were higher in those on NPPV and suggested that these data support HFNC as superior to NPPV. The commentary by Bem (2) congratulates the authors without addressing the major pitfalls of this study design, further reinforcing my concern. As Bem (2) points out the study by Clayton et al (1) concludes '… HFNC would truly be superior to NPPV as suggested from the large retrospective cohort.'

This article (1) and its commentary addresses a larger threat to evidence-based pediatric critical care medicine. Due to conflicting and inconclusive prospective randomized controlled trials, the evidence for critically ill children is more often being provided by large observational trials. The recent uptick and potential dangers of using large, readily accessible datasets for observational trials have raised the attention of clinical researchers in other areas of medicine as well. In the fall of 2018, a group of 47 journal editors published guidelines for the design and reporting of observational causal inference studies for this reason (3). The authors describe the attraction to large datasets for their statistical power but warn of the significant potential for erroneous conclusions without meticulous study design and hypotheses driven by biological plausibility. 'Fishing expeditions' in large databases will find statistically significant p values that are tempting to report. However, senior authors should guide sound study designs, and appropriate hypothesis testing and peer-reviewers should screen for responsible-reporting and study validity.

The article by Clayton et al (1) shows the danger of not doing so. A junior researcher or trainee could conclude from the study (1) that NPPV is ineffective and HFNC is superior, as even summarized by the physician providing commentary. They could act to put a child with acute respiratory failure whom they previously would have placed on NPPV on HFNC instead. Physiologically and clinically, this is concerning.

This observational study failed in ensuring that the populations being compared carried the same risk of the outcome before the exposure occurred. It is illogical to assume that a clinician would place the same patient on either HFNC or NPPV. The study by Clayton et al (1) used a dataset of patients treated at many different institutions, on or off protocol, without any standardized indication for HFNC versus NPPV. Even without protocols or standards of care or international guidelines, HFNC does not physiologically provide as much support as NPPV. As sicker patients needing more support would go right to NPPV, one can assume reasonably that this group was 'sicker' and had a higher risk of intubation at a baseline than those placed on HFNC first. The only thing the authors can conclude with this dataset and their design is exactly that. There is no statistical manipulation that will remove the residual confounding inherent in comparing two groups of patients that will not have the same odds of the primary outcome regardless of exposure status.

Publishing improperly designed studies with unsubstantiated conclusions not only reflects on the peer review process but on the journal and the field. In an era of social media, for-profit medical journals, and short attention spans, only well designed studies with validity and rigorous analyses deserve publication in leading medical journals (4).

Dr. Hassinger has disclosed that she does not have any potential conflicts of interest.

Amanda B. Hassinger, MD, MS, Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, John R. Oishei Children's Hospital, University of Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, NY

REFERENCES

Clayton JA, McKee B, Slain KN, et al: Outcomes of Children With Bronchiolitis Treated With High-Flow Nasal Cannula or Noninvasive Positive Pressure Ventilation. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2019; 20:128-135

Bem RA: Noninvasive high flow versus noninvasive positive pressure in children with severe bronchiolitis: The battle of the PICU continues. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2019; 20:192-193

Lederer DJ, Bell SC, Branson RD, et al: Control of confounding and reporting of results in causal inference studies. Guidance for authors from editors of respiratory, sleep, and critical care journals. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019; 16:22-28

Maslove DM, Leisman DE: Causal inference from observational data: New guidance from pulmonary, critical care, and sleep journals. Crit Care Med 2019; 47:1-2

DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000002002

The authors reply:

W e thank Hassinger (1) for her interest in our work published recently in Pediatric Critical Care Medicine (2) and her letter (1), which we hope will bring ample attention to the issues raised. When taking our article

796

www.pccmjournal.org

August 2019 · Volume 20 · Number 8

Copyright © 2019 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies.

Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
