Page 1 of 32

      Ancillary Effects of Dexmedetomidine

           Sedation After Cardiac Surgery

                  Alparslan Turan, M.D. and Colleagues

                   Department of OUTCOMES RESEARCH
                              Cleveland Clinic

                                 NCT02004613
                               JANUARY 12, 2016

      1/12/2016

                                                 Preface
        Dexmedetomidine is FDA approved for procedural and critical care sedation. It is
widely used for this purpose and has an excellent efficacy and safety record. Like any
drug,  dexmedetomidine  presumably  has  ancillary  side  effects  and  benefits.                    Likely
consequences       are reduced risk of atrial fibrillation and flutter,         reduced postoperative
delirium, renal protection or harm, and reduced persistent incisional pain. On the other
hand, dexmedetomidine costs more than other sedatives such as propofol.                          We thus
propose to evaluate the ancillary         effect of dexmedetomidine sedation, and the cost of
dexmedetomidine use.
         Our proposed study fully complies with the letter and spirit of the rules for IND
exemptions: 1) we will not use study results to support an FDA application for a new
indication and labeling; 2) the investigation will not support a change in advertising;
3) the dose, route, and population in this study will be as approved; and, 4) the study
will be conducted with IRB approval and dexmedetomidine will not be represented as
safe or effective for the outcomes under study.

                                          1. Background

        Dexmedetomidine is an alpha-2 adrenoreceptor agonist with known sedative and
analgesic properties      (1). It also causes reduction in blood pressure, bradycardia, and
inhibition   of   platelet   aggregation,   renin   release   and   insulin   secretion                 (1).
Dexmedetomidine has a chemical structure similar to clonidine, but with a greater
affinity for the alpha-2 receptor (36).       Dexmedetomidine has been used successfully in
anesthesia for  neurosurgery,  cardiac          surgery,  and  bariatric  surgery,  as  well  as  for
sedation in the intensive care unit (2).
        Since its approval by the FDA in 1999, dexmedetomidine has been increasingly
used in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to facilitate both sedation and analgesia, as it is
associated with low respiratory depression (3). Postsurgical patients are often intubated
and mechanically ventilated         (4). It is a common practice to use a benzodiazepine or
propofol    for   sedation   in   mechanically   ventilated   patients   and   then   switch   to
dexmedetomidine   to   attempt   extubation.   However,               dexmedetomidine   has   been
increasingly administered as a continuous infusion throughout the ICU admission                       (64).
The  dexmedetomidine-induced  sleep  and  non-rapid  eye  movement  sleep  mimics
normal sleep, i.e. patients can be easily aroused, and thus there are clinical advantages
to both the individual and care providers (3).
        Hemodynamic effects
        Dexmedetomidine is known to have sympatholytic effects on hemodynamics at
low  doses,  however  increased  peripheral  vascular  resistance  and  blood  pressure
(systemic and pulmonary) can be observed at high doses. In anesthetized dogs, the
dexmedetomidine (5) administration lowered heart rate, cardiac index (CI) and systemic
oxygen transport index in comparison with the control group. (6) Aortic cross- camping

        1/12/2016                                                                                         2

increased mean arterial pressure (MAP) and systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI)
in both groups, but the effects were greater with dexmedetomidine. CI, heart rate, and
systemic  oxygen  transport  index  were  lower,  while  central  venous  pressure  and
pulmonary artery occlusion pressure were higher with dexmedetomidine compared to
controls. After aortic unclamping, MAP, CVP and SVRI were maintained higher by
dexmedetomidine       (6).  In a small study in vascular surgery, patients were randomly
assigned to achieve three plasma levels of dexmedetomidine (0.15 ng/ml (low dose),
0.30 ng/ml (medium dose), or 0.45 ng/ml (high dose). The medication was administered
as  a  continuous  infusion  from  1  h  before  induction  of  anesthesia  until  48  h
postoperatively    (1). In all subjects heart rate decreased (low dose 11%, medium dose
5%, and high dose 20%) and systolic blood pressure decreased (low dose 3%, medium
dose 12%, and high dose 20%). (7) A targeted plasma concentration of 0.45 ng/ml (on
average 8.03 micro g /kg (range 5.57              –  9.87 micro g/kg) was found beneficial for
stabilizing  perioperative  hemodynamics  in  vascular  surgery  patients,  and  also  for
decreasing   anesthetic   requirements,   and   decreasing   the   level   of   circulating
catecholamine’s. (7)
        Cardiac function and coronary blood flow
        In healthy patients, the administration of dexmedetomidine slightly depresses
systolic function without altering the diastolic function. This negative inotropic effect may
be associated to a reduction in the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine during
dexmedetomidine infusion. Moreover, a reduction in the cardiac work and sympatholytic
effect is responsible of a substantial decrease in myocardial blood flow, thus coupling
between cardiac oxygen demand and supply is maintained. (7)                   In an animal model of
coronary ischemia, dexmedetomidine showed an anti-ischemic effect also related to
sympatholysis  and  improved  myocardial  oxygen  balance  with  preferred  blood  flow
distribution  to  the  endocardium       (5). Therefore,  medications  that  favors  or  improve
coronary blood flow are favorable in the immediate postoperative period of cardiac
surgery.
        Cardiac Surgery and Dexmedetomidine use
        There are many rationales to use dexmedetomidine in cardiac surgery. Jalonen
et  al. (9)  evaluated  dexmedetomidine  use  in  patients  undergoing  coronary  artery
revascularization they      determined that dexmedetomidine decreased the sympathetic
tone and attenuated the hyper dynamic response to surgery but increased hypotension.
In a recent study (10), with dexmedetomidine infusion HR and MAP were found to be
moderately decreased in comparison to baseline values and no severe bradycardia or
hypotension requiring intervention was encountered. They determined no response to
sternotomy and bypass. Dexmedetomidine can be safely used in CABG operations
delivering a stable hemodynamic status throughout the operative period. Furthermore,
dexmedetomidine was found to decrease the need of inhalational anesthetics required
for cardiac surgery (11). And another recent study demonstrated that dexmedetomidine
combined with ketamine had significant cardio protective effects in cardiac surgery
compared to inhalational agent combined with opioids (12).                  Cardiovascular mortality
and morbidity can be decreased with the sympatholytic effects of α2-receptor agonists
in patients with coronary artery disease, however this was not adequately studied.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       3

        Effect on cardiac electrophysiology
        Dexmedetomidine has prominent effect on the cardiac conduction system. Sinus
node   and  atrial   ventricular   nodal  function   is   significantly   depressed   after   the
administration  of  dexmedetomidine.           (13)   The  results  from  a  small  trial  in  children
undergoing cardiac surgery indicate a potential role in the treatment of acute onset of
atrial or junctional tachycardia. Briefly, a rapid bolus of 0.5 to 1 mcg/kg/min in patients
with reentry type supraventricular tachycardia converted this rhythm to normal sinus
rhythm. (14) In adults, the incidence of tachycardia after cardiac surgery was lower in
patients treated intraoperatively with dexmedetomidine compared to placebo. However,
the number of patients who developed new onset atrial fibrillation was comparable in
both groups. (8) In a recent study in congenital cardiac surgery, dexmedetomidine given
intraoperative   and   postoperatively   decreased   the   incidence   of   supraventricular
arrhythmias from 25% to 6%, without significant adverse effects. (15)                     In a laboratory
study,  dexmedetomidine          also   prevented  halothane-epinephrine  induced  ventricular
tachycardia by increasing the dysrrhytmogenic dose and the plasma concentrations at
which arrhythmia occurs. (16)
        Dexmedetomidine and Inflammation
        Cardiac surgery and cardiopulmonary bypass strongly triggers an inflammatory
response. Increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines can be detected during and
after  cardiac  surgery      (17).  Atrial  fibrillation  after  cardiac  surgery       seems  to     be  in
response to a pro-inflammatory state.           (18) The administration of corticosteroids during
cardiac surgery has shown the decrease the incidence of atrial fibrillation.                  (19) Sepsis
and subsequently multi organ dysfunction remains as one of the leading cause of death
after cardiac surgery and both states are characterized by an uncontrolled inflammatory
response. Therefore, the use of immune-modulatory medications may be beneficial.
        Pre-clinical studies suggest that dexmedetomidine has anti-inflammatory effects.
For instance its administration ameliorates the inflammatory response associated to
spinal  cord  injury.    (20)  Moreover,  the  administration  of  dexmedetomidine  improves
survival in animals with sepsis.        (21) In Humans, dexmedetomidine infusion decreased
cytokine production in sepsis at a greater level than midazolam. There were significant
decreases in TNF-a [19.5 (5.8) vs 14.6 (4) pg ml21], IL-1b [6.29(2) vs 5 (0.30) pg ml21],
IL-6 [455.6 (338.4) vs (212.4) (198.3) pg ml21], at 24 h in the dexmedetomidine group,
compared   to   midazolam           (P,   0.05)     (22)    Similarly,   study   with   propofol   and
dexmedetomidine   demonstrated   significant   decrease   in   inflammatory   mediators
compared  to  propofol         with  dexmedetomidine  (23).            These  studies  suggest  that
dexmedetomidine may have a positive impact in controlling the inflammatory response
associated to cardiac surgery. And number of studies has demonstrated that giving
corticosteroids prophylactically decreases the risk of atrial fibrillation.
Preliminary Results on atrial arrhythmia and Rationale
        Previously defined effect on cardiac electrophysiology and inflammation makes
dexmedetomidine  reasonable  preventive  drug  for  post  cardiac  surgery  fibrillation.
However,  there  is  no  prospective  randomized  clinical  study  evaluating  this  in  the
literature in adult patient population. Supporting these, in a recent previous retrospective
study (24), we used data from the Cleveland Clinic Cardiac Anesthesiology database,

        1/12/2016                                                                                          4

and compared patients who were or were not given dexmedetomidine for postoperative
sedation within 3 days after cardiac surgery using a multivariable logistic regression,
adjusting for imbalanced covariables. In this study, we evaluated the electronic records
of   17,776  patients,  including   765   cardiac   patients   given            dexmedetomidine         for
postoperative sedation in ICU, and 17,011 cardiac patients who did not. After adjusting
for imbalanced factors we found that patients given postoperative dexmedetomidine had
a decreased odds of for having atrial arrhythmias: 0.74 (95% CI: 0.60, 0.91, P = 0.004).
In a recent report (25), dexmedetomidine was started after surgery in ICU and they
determined the incidence of atrial fibrillation to be 6 % in dexmedetomidine group
compared to 35% in the control group.

        There   are   significant   preliminary   evidence   to   support   the   concept   of
dexmedetomidine  to  be  effective  in  prevention  of  atrial  arrhythmias  after  cardiac
surgery, however there are no studies done in adult patient population to evaluate these
in a randomized controlled trial.

Preliminary Results on Delirium and Rationale
        Studies evaluating delirium after cardiac surgery with dexmedetomidine have
mixed results.    Maldonado et al. (26) determined that dexmedetomidine after cardiac
surgery decreased the incidence of delirium from 50 % to 3%. However, in another
study dexmedetomidine was compared with morphine and                      dexmedetomidine reduced
the duration but not the incidence of delirium after cardiac surgery (27). However, these
studies are underpowered to determine for certain the effect of dexmedetomidine on
delirium after cardiac surgery. Current study with large sample size will bring information
about dexmedetomidine and delirium.

Incidence of Atrial fibrillations and Delirium

        An  estimated  17  million  people  in  world  die  of  cardiovascular  diseases,
particularly heart attacks and strokes, every year. Heart disease is also the leading
cause of death in the United States. In 2007, one-quarter of all deaths (616,000) were
from diseases of the heart (27). Heart diseases like ischemic heart disease, congenital
or valvular heart diseases require cardiac surgery at some point. As a consequence,
coronary revascularization, comprising coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery
and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), are among the most common major
medical procedures provided by the US health care system, with more than 7 million
procedures performed annually (28). It is also among the most costly                      with  inpatient
payments to hospitals for coronary revascularizations exceeded $6.7 billion in fiscal
year 2006    for Medicare patients alone, an amount larger than the reimbursement for
any other medical or surgical procedure) (29).

        Most of the cardiac surgeries require use of cardio pulmonary bypass (CPB),
which  is  responsible  for  major  inflammatory  response  seen  in  this  surgery.  This
response is associated with most of the postoperative complications. Recovery period
after cardiac surgery is frequently affected with different complications. Furthermore 4-
5% of patients will not survive their hospital stay after            cardiac surgery. Postoperative
atrial arrhythmia    and delirium are      the most common complications             encountered after

        1/12/2016                                                                                        5

CABG  surgery.  Postoperative  atrial  arrhythmias  affect  morbidity,  mortality,  prolong
intensive   care   unit  and   hospital   stay,   and   increase   costs             related   to   surgery
(30,31,32,33).     Delirium is an important prognostic determinant of hospital outcomes
including  poor  cognitive  recovery,  functional  decline,  nursing  home  placement  and
death (34,35).     Prevention of atrial arrhythmias          and delirium     after cardiac surgery has
been infrequently studied with some success.

Atrial Arrhythmias after Cardiac surgery
        Incidence and Clinical Impact
        Postoperative atrial arrhythmias incidence ranges depending on surgery type.
The incidence of postoperative atrial arrhythmias specifically atrial fibrillation is between
25-35 % in isolated CABG and higher in valve procedures; the incidence is around 50 %
in combined surgeries (36). Incidence is continuously rising, which seems to be related
to patients undergoing cardiac surgery are getting older since incidence is very much
dependent on age. Atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery usually occurs between day 2
and 4, however can happen as late as postoperative day 6 (37). There are many factors
associated with occurrence; history of atrial fibrillation, gender, left atrium enlargement,
renal failure and diabetes are some (38).
        Previous  studies  have  found  that  atrial  fibrillation  after  cardiac  surgery  has
significant association with morbidity and mortality             (39,40,41,42,43). In a recent study,
patients with atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery had higher rates of 1 year all-cause
mortality (40). A meta-analysis evaluating mortality after new onset atrial fibrillation after
cardiac  surgery  included  11  studies  with  over  40                thousand  patients        (41).  They
determined that new onset atrial fibrillation was associated with 50 % increase in short
term mortality and almost doubled the risk of dying in 1 and 4 years after surgery.
Villareal et al. (6)    also found that new-onset           atrial fibrillation  was associated with a
higher risk of in-hospital mortality (OR, 1.5 [95% CI, 1.3–1.8]; P<0.0001). Mariscalco et
al. (44) followed 1832 patients (570 with new-onset atrial fibrillation) for up to 6 years
and Ahlsson and colleagues             (45) followed 1419        patients (419 with new-onset            atrial
fibrillation)  up  to  9  years  after  CABG.  A  higher  number  of  deaths  owing  to
cerebrovascular      events    (51/82 vs 20/ 419)         was    reported by Mariscalco          et al.,  (44)
although some of the difference in mortality resulting                 from cerebral events could be
related to how new-onset atrial fibrillation was treated.
        Researchers demonstrated increase in need for mechanical support, prolonged
ventilator support and renal failure after cardiac surgery. There are also many other
complications  associated  with  atrial  fibrillation  including  thromboembolic  events,
perioperative     myocardial     infarction           gastrointestinal     complications,     infective
complications  (e.g.,  septicemia,  mediastinitis  and  pneumonia),  cognitive  changes,
stroke,    hemodynamic           issues    and    ventricular    dysrhythmias            (41,42,43,44,45).
Furthermore, postoperative atrial fibrillation was estimated to prolong hospital stay by
almost 4.9 days, and hence, the cost of atrial fibrillation             and level of hospital resources
was significant (31). Aranki et al (38) reported duration of hospitalization in patients with
postoperative atrial fibrillation      an average of 3 to 4 days longer than in patients in
normal  sinus  rhythm.        Other  authors  reported  similar  results,  with           additional  costs
attributable to postoperative atrial fibrillation ranging from $5,000 to $12,000 per patient
(47,48,49).

        1/12/2016                                                                                            6

        Pathophysiology and Mechanisms
        The mechanisms behind atrial fibrillation seem to be multifactorial and have not
been fully identified. Previous studies have suggested that atrial fibrillation may be result
of an existing electrophysiological disturbance that becomes prominent with all the insult
to cardiac tissue (50). Mechanisms like pericardial inflammation, autonomic imbalance
during the postoperative period, excessive production of catecholamine’s, and a fluid
shift with resultant changes in volume and              pressure, operative trauma, inflammation,
autonomic  nervous  system  imbalance  are  all  attributed  to  the  development  of
postoperative atrial fibrillation (37). These           factors alter atrial refractoriness; causing
multiple  re  entry  wavelets  seems  to  be  the  electrophysiological  mechanism  of
postoperative atrial fibrillation (35).      In support of this amiodarone has been used with
some success in prevention of postoperative atrial fibrillation (51).
        Inflammation seems to play significant role in pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation
after cardiac surgery. Cardiac surgery causes local and systemic inflammation, which
has been shown to be associated with atrial fibrillation and facilitate re entry                    (52,53).
Extracorporeal circulation is the main reason for systemic inflammatory response, and
mediators of inflammation like leukocytosis and C-reactive protein (CRP) were found to
be  the  independent  predictor  of  atrial  fibrillation  (54,55).           IL-6  is  pro-inflammatory
cytokine that is involved in the synthesis of acute phase proteins                     similar to   such as
CRP. In patients undergoing cardiac surgery the development of postoperative                            atrial
fibrillation was related to increased levels of IL-6, and linked to polymorphisms in the
promoter region of       the IL-6 gene (56).      Surgical trauma to the atria is associated with
local inflammation, which explains why patients undergoing valvular surgery have the
highest risk of developing atrial fibrillation (57,58). Because of this, less manipulation of
the  atria  decreases  local  atrial  inflammation,  and  subsequently,  atrial  fibrillation.
Inflammation  is  involved  in  its  initiation,  and  the  arrhythmia  itself  generates  an
inflammatory response that results in persistence of atrial fibrillation (58). Inflammation
also appears to directly alter        atrial conduction properties (53). In animal studies atrial
inflammation was associated with incidence and duration of atrial fibrillation                     (52), and
inflammation changes distribution of connexin proteins, which have important role in
intercellular communication linked to atrial fibrillation            (59). Furthermore in support of
these corticosteroids, anti-inflammatory drugs like colchicine and statins were found to
be  effective  on  postoperative  atrial  fibrillation  probably  by  decreasing  inflammation
(60,61,62).
        Prevention of Atrial Arrhythmias
        Treatment of atrial fibrillation is difficult, requires multiple treatment options and
often results in interventions. Prevention is preferred especially in post cardiac surgery
atrial   fibrillations.  Many   studies   have   evaluated   the   effectiveness   of               different
pharmacologic      interventions to prevent        or decrease the incidence of           atrial fibrillation.
Although some of these pharmacological interventions have been shown to decrease
the incidence of atrial fibrillation with some success, there is still no accepted single
preventive  drug  that  does  work  for  all  patients.  Long-term  outcomes  of  these
interventions for post cardiac surgery atrial fibrillation are also unknown. Furthermore,
effect on hospital stay and its associated economic impact also remains controversial.
Pharmacological agents used with some success are amiodarone, magnesium and

        1/12/2016                                                                                            7

beta-blocker drugs. There are also some side effects of these interventions and they are
not suitable for all patients.

Delirium after Cardiac surgery
        Incidence and Clinical Impact
        The incidence and prevalence of delirium vary widely between different study
populations. The reported incidence of postoperative delirium in a systemic review                       by
Dyer et al. ranged from 0% to 73.5% (36). Ten to 30% of patients admitted to a general
hospital  develop  delirium  and  a  prevalence  of  up  to  60%  is  recognized  in  elderly
patients (64). Patients in intensive care units are           especially   at high risk of developing
delirium. In a recent study in postoperative elderly patients an incidence of 43% was
found (65). However, types of patients, the method of the study and the diagnostic
criteria  used,  influence  the  incidence  reported.  Generally,  an  incidence  of  25%  is
assumed among all hospitalized elderly patients (63).
        Patients who undergo cardiac surgery have an increased risk of developing
delirium. In a recent study the incidence of delirium following cardiac surgery was found
to be 21%      and the European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation could
predict a postoperative delirium in patients who underwent elective cardiac surgery (66).
In another study the incidence of delirium was 13.5% to 20%, higher                       in patients 60
years and older (67). In a recent study,           the prevalence of postoperative delirium was
41.7% as diagnosed by the psychiatrist based on DSM-IV criteria (68).                        Two recent
studies by Rudolph showed an incidence of delirium after cardiac surgery ranging
between 42 and 50%          (69,70).   Developments in operative and anesthetic techniques
have enabled older patients to undergo cardiac surgery. This may be an important
cause of the increase in the frequency of delirium in the foreseeable future.
        Delirium  is  an  important  independent  prognostic  determinant  of  hospital
outcomes including nursing home placement, functional decline, and death                          (35,36).
Postoperative  delirium      increases     postoperative  complications         and   prolongs    hospital
stays (44-47). Even brief episodes of postoperative delirium can impact significantly on
the patient’s ability to live independently after hospital discharge                (48).  In addition to
functional  decline  and  dementia,  delirium  is  associated  with  increased  mortality.
Hospital mortality in patients with delirium has been estimated to be between 10% and
65%(49). This is significantly higher than that in patients without delirium and can be
compared with patients with perioperative myocardial infarction. Mortality after hospital
discharge is also higher for those who had delirium, estimated to be 22–76% during the
months following surgery (50).  In a prospective study of 921 patients age 65 or older
who  underwent  surgery  for  hip  fracture,  Edelstein  found  that  those  who  had
postoperative  delirium  had  a  significantly  longer  mean  length  of  hospitalization
(P<0.001) and significantly higher rates of mortality at 1 year (odds ratio = 2.4; 95% CI
1.1-4.9; P=0.02)(44).

        Pathophysiology and Mechanisms
        The fundamental pathophysiological mechanism of delirium remains unclear. The
etiology of postoperative delirium seems to be multifactorial and includes pain (51-53),

        1/12/2016                                                                                         8

sleep deprivation     (54-59), surgical stress, anesthetic effects, concomitant medications
(53-58)    and   the   inflammatory   response   to   surgery.   Further   supportive   of   an
inflammatory etiology is Rudolph’s recent identification of atherosclerosis score as a
significant  risk  factor  for  postoperative  delirium  in  cardiac  surgery  patients               (42).
Dexmedetomidine  has  anti-inflammatory  properties,  decreases  use  of  opioids  and
benzodiazepines       that are blamed for delirium, and provides sedation very similar to
natural sleep that can attenuate delirium seen after cardiac surgery.

Renal Function and Dexmedetomidine

        Acute  kidney  injury  and  kidney  problems  are  recognized  complication  of
cardiovascular  surgery  and  associated  with  high  mortality  and  costs-of-care.  The
pathogenesis is multifactorial and involves hemodynamic, inflammatory and nephrotoxic
components.  (87)       The  effect  of  dexmedetomidine  on  the  renal  function  has  been
inadequately  studied.       There  are  multiple  mechanisms  that  dexmedetomidine  can
influence kidney functions;

        Effect on Blood Flow

        Cardiac  surgery  activates  sympathetic  nervous  system;  dexmedetomidine-
induced  sympatholysis  might  attenuate  harmful  hemodynamic  events  resulting  in
prevention of acute kidney injury. In a small prospective study, administration of the
alpha agonist clonidine at a rate of 4 micrograms/kg iv                 over a period of 15 min, 1h
before  induction  of  anesthesia  preserved  postoperative  creatinine  clearance  in
comparison to controls, where it reduced with 30 ml/min.                    (88)  This may suggest a
significant influence even when administered for a short time. A randomized controlled
trial that compared the sedative effect of dexmedetomidine with propofol found higher
urinary output without the need of high doses of diuretics. (89) In another small study
(n=28) in thoracic surgery, dexmedetomidine infusion in addition to epidural analgesia
suggested a beneficial effect on glomerular filtration measured by increased urinary
output and preserved creatinine levels and higher                 creatinine clearance, whereas in
controls   there   was   a   21   %   reduction   of   creatinine   levels.          (90).   Conversely,
dexmedetomidine could worsen kidney function via hypotension.

        In case series of CABG surgery patients, plasma BUN and creatinine levels did
not increase on the postoperative period in the dexmedetomidine group in contrast to
the  control  group.     (91)  A  study  in  vascular  surgery  did  not  report  any  laboratory
differences between the three target blood levels of dexmedetomidine, which may not
suggest a dose effect, but renal function was not the main objective of the study. (92) A
recent study in cardiac surgery patients determined no harmful effect but increase in
urinary output suggesting beneficial effect (93).

        Cellular effects
        Ischemia-reperfusion injury is one of the most serious causes of acute renal
failure. (94)   In a recent animal model of ischemic kidney, the kidneys of untreated
animals showed tubular cell swelling, cellular vacuolization, pyknotic nuclei, medullary

        1/12/2016                                                                                          9

congestion,  and  moderate  to  severe  necrosis.  On  the  opposite  treatment  with
dexmedetomidine showed normal glomeruli and only slight edema of the tubular cells.
(95)
Postoperative Cognitive Deficit and Dexmedetomidine
        Postoperative cognitive deficit (POCD) is an important and common complication
of  cardiac  surgery  with  and       without  cardiopulmonary  bypass.           (95)   In  a  study  by
Newman and colleagues a significant cognitive decline, defined as a 20% reduction
from baseline, occurred in 53% of patients at discharge, 36% at 6 weeks, 24% at 6
months, and 42% at 5 years. (96) Some other studies also report an incidence ranging
from 8% to 40% (97). Cognitive impairment              causes    lower general health after cardiac
surgery with important implications for future care of these patients undergoing cardiac
surgery (98).    Inflammation plays and important role in POCD. Cardiac surgery with or
without  Bypass  causes  an  enormous  release  of  inflammatory  mediators  to  the
circulation. The effect of dexmedetomidine on POCD has not been studied previously,
although there are ongoing trials looking at the effect of dexmedetomidine on delirium
but not on POCD. There are compelling reasons to believe that dexmedetomidine can
prevent delirium and POCD after cardiac surgery.
Chronic Pain-Cardiac Surgery and Dexmedetomidine
        A  potential  adverse  outcome  of  surgery             is  the  development  of  persistent
postoperative incisional pain. Persistent postoperative pain is defined as incisional pain
developing after a surgical procedure that lasts at least three months for which other
causes  (i.e., malignancy  or  chronic  infection)  have  been  excluded.               (99)   There  are
number of factors involved in this chronic pain formation, most importantly injury caused
by surgery which produces intense pain signals. These signals are emitted from the
peripheral nerves and tissues and sensitize the nociceptive pathways in the central
nervous system (CNS)(100,101), which leads to restructuring and central sensitization
in  the  CNS     —   which  is    then  amplified  by  ongoing  peripheral  input.           (102)   Once
established, persistent incisional pain is difficult to        control or eliminate; pain persisting
after surgery is likely to be permanent.

        Persistent postoperative pain is common; a number of retrospective and a few
prospective studies have defined the incidence in certain surgical populations. The
incidence of chronic chest wall, breast, or scar pain ranges from 11 to 57%; phantom
breast pain is reported by 13–24% of mastectomy patients, while 12–51% report arm or
shoulder pain. (103) The reported incidence of thoracotomy pain varies from 30 to 50%
(104-106); however this is less well established after cardiac surgery. The prevalence of
chronic pain reported after cardiac surgery varies from 11% to 61%. Taillefer et al (107)
in a retrospective survey study determined that the incidence of non-anginal persistent
postoperative  pain  affected  23%  of  patients  after  cardiac  surgery.  These  reports
demonstrate that cardiac surgery is associated with increased chronic pain.

        Why some patients develop persistent incisional pain remains unknown. But one
theory is that severe acute pain, such as a scalpel blade cutting through skin, provokes
activation  of  high-threshold  peripheral  sensory  neurons  which  signal  the  presence,
location, and intensity of the injury. Normally, peripheral sensory neuron activation fades
once the stimulus is removed. Inflammatory pain is the heightened pain sensitivity that

        1/12/2016                                                                                        10

occurs  in  response  to  tissue  injury  and  inflammation  and  is  termed  peripheral
sensitization.   Peripheral  sensitization  results  from  the  local  action  of  inflammatory
mediators, including prostanoids released from injured and inflammatory cells, on the
peripheral terminals of high-threshold nociceptor sensory neurons.                    Inflammatory pain
persists until the surgical wound has healed. If a focus of ongoing inflammation persists,
so will the pain. But peripheral pain can also provoke central sensitization, which is an
increase in the excitability of spinal neurons because of persistent nociceptive afferent
input  from  peripheral  neurons.  It         thus  seems  likely       that   good  control  of  acute
postoperative pain and inflammation by aggressive early pain management reduces the
risk of persistent incisional pain by blunting central sensitization (100,101).

        Dexmedetomidine   has   anti-inflammatory   and   analgesic   properties.   Anti-
inflammatory   properties   of   dexmedetomidine   have   been   previously   described.
Clonidine, an     α2-adrenergic receptor (α2-AR) agonist, has been widely used as an
analgesic  adjuvant  in  perioperative  conditions  and  chronic  pain  therapy  (108).
Dexmedetomidine comes from same family of drugs with clonidine using the same
receptors with different affinity. Intraoperative          dexmedetomidine         (bolus dose of 0.5-1
µg/kg, with or without continuous infusion of 0.5-2 µg/kg per hour) causes a significant
reduction in the need for both intraoperative and postoperative analgesics in adults
(109) and in children (110). Although elimination half-life of              dexmedetomidine is short
(i.e.,  2-3  hours),  the  analgesic-sparing  effect  observed  after  a  preoperative  or  an
intraoperative  administration  usually  lasts  up  to  24  hours,  with  the  anxiolytic  and
sedative properties implicated as being partly  responsible for this effect (110,111).
Dexmedetomidine         when added to intravenous patient-controlled analgesia morphine
improved postoperative analgesia and decreased postoperative morphine consumption
by 30%, as well as decreasing morphine-induced side effects like nausea, without
additional sedation (112). α2-AR agonists and opioids act by different mechanisms and
thus their combination produces a synergistic analgesic effect without increasing the
respiratory depression that is often associated with opioid use (108).

        Literature in regards to effect of dexmedetomidine on chronic postoperative pain
does not exist. There are nonetheless good pathophysiological reasons to believe that
dexmedetomidine  will  be  effective  in  prevention  of  chronic  pain.  For  example,
dexmedetomidine can be effective on persistent postoperative pain formation either by
decreasing  inflammation  which  plays  a  crucial  role  in                maintaining  of  peripheral
sentisation and/or providing better acute pain control which is blamed as an important
factor in chronic pain formation.

Pharmaco-economics
        The impact of postoperative atrial fibrillation is significant from not only a clinical
standpoint but from an economic standpoint.  The additional cost attributable to atrial
fibrillation has not been well defined but is estimated between $10,000-$11,000 per
patient in the US.  Considering current rates, the extra cost of postoperative atrial
fibrillation for the US is conservatively estimated at around $2 billion per year.
        Increased length of stay is the greatest contributor to additional costs attributable
to post operative atrial fibrillation.  The increased length of stay has been estimated
around 4.9 days.  This additional length of stay is costly to patients but extremely costly

        1/12/2016                                                                                         11

to hospitals. As the proportion of fixed payment patients including Medicare per hospital
increases with time and the influx of baby boomers, the cost to hospitals will only
increase. In addition, in line with Affordable Care Act, reimbursements for complications
such as postoperative atrial fibrillation will be limited an        d therefore have further financial
impacts for a hospital.
        One barrier to using dexmedetomidine               in the postoperative period is that it          is
relatively expensive compared to other sedative drugs.                   However, the complications
including atrial fibrillation associated with other cheaper sedative drugs are extremely
costly.    The  costs  of  using  Dexmedetomidine  for  preventing  atrial  arrhythmias  as
compared to the cost of cheaper sedatives and the costs of treating the associated
complications has not been addressed.  Therefore, assessing the cost-effectiveness of
Dexmedetomidine needs to be investigated as well.

        1/12/2016                                                                                         12

                                           2. Study Objectives

        Our  goal  is  to  evaluate  the  effects  of  intraoperative  and  postoperative
dexmedetomidine sedation (versus placebo) on a variety of important outcomes in
patients recovering from cardiac surgery. Specifically, we will use dexmedetomine as a
sedative  in  the  FDA-approved  dose,  by  the  approved  route,  and  in  the  approved
population. The proposed research will have the following aims:

Primary Aims; We will have two primary aims in current study.

Primary Aim 1.To assess whether dexmedetomidine sedation decreases the incidence
of atrial arrhythmias.
Hypothesis.     Our   first primary  hypothesis  is  that       the  incidence  of     new-onset  atrial
arrhythmia    (any  of   atrial  flutter  and   atrial  fibrillation) is  reduced    in  patients    given
dexmedetomidine.
Primary Aim 2. To assess whether dexmedetomidine sedation reduces                          postoperative
delirium.
Hypothesis. Our second primary hypothesis is that, in patients given dexmedetomidine,
the incidence of delirium is reduced during the initial five postoperative days.

Secondary Aims;

Secondary      Aim    1.  To   assess  whether      dexmedetomidine         sedation  reduces      kidney
injury.
Hypothesis. Kidney function evaluated by RIFLE score                  is better  preserved in patients
given dexmedetomidine.
Secondary      Aim   2.  To assess     whether    dexmedetomidine        sedation reduces persistent
incisional pain.
Hypothesis. The incidence of incisional pain 3 months after cardiac surgery is reduced
in patients given dexmedetomidine sedation.
Specific Aim 3.       To assess     the  cost-effectiveness of dexmedetomidine after cardiac
surgery.
Hypothesis. Dexmedetomidine reduces the cost of care.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       13

                                                   3. Method
        We propose to assess atrial arrhythmias, delirium, kidney function, persistent
pain,  and  health  economics         in  patients    having    cardiac  surgery  who        are   randomly
assigned to dexmedetomidine sedation or placebo.

Type of Study
This  study  is     a  multicenter,     randomized,  double-blind  placebo  controlled  trial  of
dexmedetomidine         sedation     in  adults  having       cardiac  surgery.         The  participating
institutions are as follows:
       Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
       Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
       Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
       Florida Hospital Winter Park, Winter Park, Florida
       University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland
       University of California, Los Angeles, California
       Flagler Hospital, St. Augustine, Florida

Setting and Population
Inclusion criteria:
    (1) 18-85 years old;
    (2) Scheduled for cardiac surgery with bypass  (CABG, valve, or combined);
    (3) Able to provide a written informed consent;
    (4) Hemodynamically stable (heart rate>= 50).

Exclusion criteria:
(1) Sick sinus syndrome or Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome;
(2) Atrio-ventricular block;
(3)Hypersensitivity or known allergy to dexmedetomidine
(4) Hepatic disease, e.g. twice the normal level of liver enzymes;
(5) AF within 1 preoperative month;
(6) Permanent pacemaker;
(7) Use of amiodarone or dexmedetomidine within the last 30 days;
(8) Patients with an ejection fraction under 30% or who had severe heart failure;
(9) Myocardial infarction in the previous 7 days;
(10) Body mass index >= 40 (BMI= mass (kg) / height (m)2);
(11) Those taking clonidine within last 48 hours.
Protocol
        Patients must meet all inclusion and exclusion criteria to be eligible for the study.
After eligibility is confirmed, the patients will receive complete information about the
study both verbally and in writing. Informed consent must be obtained from the patients

        1/12/2016                                                                                          14

prior to randomization and study-specific procedures. Once all eligibility criteria are
fulfilled (including informed consent), the patients may be randomized, and treatment
allocation will be performed. Key baseline patients characteristics, as well as patient’s
eligibility criteria, will be collected on case report forms.

        The anesthetic management             will follow  pre-established      clinical and institutional
guidelines. Patients will be premedicated, and induced per institution routine                   according
to  attending  anesthesiologist  discretion.  Prophylactic  antibiotics  will  be  given  per
surgical routine.    Patients will be randomly assigned to dexmedetomidine or placebo
groups (normal saline administration matching dexmedetomidine rate of infusion)                         after
they   have   met   the   inclusion/exclusion   criteria   and             consented      to   the   study.
Randomization will be web-based and out of the control of any investigator.

        Dexmedetomidine infusion, without a bolus dose, (or a comparable volume of
placebo) will be initiated before the surgical incision at a rate of 0.1 g/kg/hr; at the end
of bypass, the dose will be increased to             0.2 g/kg/hr. However, the         anesthesiologists
may  modify  the  dose  as  clinically           indicated  based  on  hemodynamic  and  other
physiologic responses. Patients with hypotension will be treated first with vasopressors
and fluids according to clinical standards; if not responding the dose of the                          study
medication will be adjusted at the discretion of the anesthesiologist.

        Intraoperative  opioids       and  benzodiazepines  will  be  left  to  discretion           of  the
anesthesiologist.      Additional  midazolam  and  opioids  will  be               titrated  to    facilitate
extubation. In patients who remain intubated, anesthesia will be further supplemented
with fentanyl or any other opioid of choice.

        Postoperatively, patients will continue to receive the study medication at a rate of
0.4  g/kg/h,. Adjustments in the          study medication       and in the administration of other
rescue sedative and analgesic agents will be made according to standard cardiac
intensive care unit sedation and analgesia protocols. This may involve propofol, opioids
and benzodiazepines according to attending ICU staff                  physician    discretion. The study
medication infusion will be continued for a total of 24 hours from the initial administration
time  intra-operatively.     Use of prophylactic            amiodarone after surgery is not
accepted.

Measurements
        Clinical  evaluators  for  the  outcomes  will  be  blinded  to  group  allocation  and
clinical research fellows not involved in evaluations will prepare the study drugs.

        Demographic data to be obtained includes height (cm), weight (kg), age (yr),
gender, (ASA) physical status, and self-declared ethnicity. Patients will be questioned
for social history (tobacco) and medical history (pulmonary disease,                     kidney disease,
diabetes mellitus,      neurological disease,       chronic pain conditions,         illegal drug usage,
alcohol abuse, myocardial infarction, and previous surgery or stent placement.

        Available preoperative laboratory tests            and current medications (according to

        1/12/2016                                                                                         15

classes) will be recorded. Data obtained from medical records will include following but
not limited to; euroscore, operation time,           perfusion time,     number of grafts,      anesthesia
induction agents, operating room returns, ICU readmissions, length of ICU stay, time to
extubation and re-intubations, will be recorded.

        Baseline   RIFLE,   creatinine   and   AKIN   scores   will   be   determined.   Pain
catastrophizing scale, Brief Pain Inventory, and SF 12               will also be completed before
surgery.

        Primary Aims
        Primary Aim 1;
        New onset atrial arrhythmia:
        Patients   in   cardiac   ICU   (CICU)   will   have   continuous   electrocardiogram
monitoring with both electronic and clinical diagnosis of atrial arrhythmias. Diagnosis of
atrial arrhythmias will be made by clinicians in ICU and recorded. Upon discharge from
the CICU, twelve-lead electrocardiograms              will be   recorded    morning and evening until
the earlier of hospital discharge or five days in unmonitored patients. A cardiologist or
anesthesiologist blinded to randomized group                 allocations will identify types of atrial
arrhythmias in each ECG. Presence of the following arrhythmias will be recorded, and
the primary outcome is defined as the presence of any of these in a patient (versus
none) from ICU admission to hospital discharge or 5 days, whichever occurs first:

        Atrial  flutter  and  atrial  fibrillation  will  be  defined  by:  1) clinician  diagnosis;
2) documented  arrhythmia  lasting  at  least  5  minutes;  or,  3) presence  of  either
arrhythmia on ECGs in unmonitored patients.

        For the evaluation of dexmedetomidine following hemodynamic parameters will
be   collected     and   evaluated;       Intra-postoperative   period   will   be   evaluated   for
hemodynamic changes every 15 minutes heart rate, blood pressure, and the following
parameters  will  be  noted  as  significant           hemodynamic  changes,            treatments     (total
vasopressor,     anti-hypertensive,  opioid,  anesthetic,  blood  and            FFP    transfusion,  total
colloid and crystalloid use) will be recorded intra-postoperatively. Requirement of intra-
aortic balloon pump, low cardiac output, open chest, permanent pacemaker, heart block
or cardio version will also be recorded.

        All other complications        seen in intraoperative or postoperative period will be
recorded     from  medical  records.        These  will  include  but  not  limited  to;  fungemia,
bacteremia, sepsis, septic shock, empyema, endocarditis, mediastinitis, sternal wound
infections, pneumonia, ARDS, atelectasis, respiratory failure, ileus, pancreatitis, multiple
organ failure and mortality.

        Preoperative and postoperative cardiac enzymes (troponin, BNP, CK M) will be
recorded from available medical records and compared.

        1/12/2016                                                                                          16

        Primary Aim 2
         Postoperative delirium;
        Our second primary outcome will be presence of delirium at any time point within
the earlier of hospital discharge and 5 days after surgery, as determined by CAM-ICU.

        Delirium will   be assessed       with the Richmond        Agitation and Sedation Scale to
assess the level of possible sedation,          and   the Confusion Assessment Method for the
ICU.  The Richmond Agitation and            Sedation Scale (RASS) is a validated, commonly
used scale assessing sedation depth (113,114). Measurements will be made twice daily
by research assistants. The evening assessment will be made after 5 PM.

        The delirium assessment will start with the Richmond Agitation and Sedation
Scale to assess the level of possible sedation, followed by the Confusion Assessment
Method for the ICU. The Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale (RASS) is a validated,
commonly used scale assessing sedation depth. (113,114)

        The Confusion Assessment Method is a validated and reliable tool for diagnosing
delirium. (115) It demonstrates sensitivity and specificity in excess of 90% compared to
a psychiatrist-rated diagnosis of delirium as well as excellent reliability between clinician
raters. A study by Zou       et al. showed that, compared with the Confusion Assessment
Method and multiple observation points, clinical diagnosis by a psychiatrist had a lower
sensitivity (89%     versus 73%) and specificity (100%              versus 93%).      (116)   Systematic
assessment  of  delirium  using  validated  rating  scales  has  therefore  been  regularly
advised.
        The Confusion Assessment Method is considered the best diagnostic tool. It is
the most widely used and studied tool. The CAM-ICU incorporates the same 4 key
features of the current DSM-IV-TR criteria for the diagnosis of postoperative delirium.
(115) The 4 features are cardinal elements of the DSM criteria for delirium:
    1.  Acute onset of mental status changes or fluctuating course
    2.  Inattention
    3.  Disorganized thinking
    4.  Altered level of consciousness
Delirium is diagnosed when both Features 1 and 2 are positive, along with either
Features 3 or 4. See Appendix 1 for the complete CAM-ICU.

        In 2007, an international group of anesthetists and neuropsychologists formed an
advisory board to create a new quality of recovery scale. It is called the Postoperative
Quality Recovery Scale (PQRS). Six domains of recovery are identified: physiological,
nociceptive (pain and nausea),          emotive (anxiety and depression), functional recovery
(return of activities of daily living), self assessed recovery, and cognitive recovery. The
scale is completed prior to surgery to provide baseline values, and then repeated after
surgery.   The conduct of the test takes approximately 5 to 10 min on each occasion.
Whilst in hospital, the scale is conducted via faced-to-face interview. The PQRS will be
conducted at baseline (at time of recruitment), in hospital will be repeated at days 3 and
before discharge.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       17

        Secondary Aims

        Secondary Aim 1;
        Kidney function
        Primary  outcome  for  kidney  function              will  be  change  overtime  in  RIFLE
classifications from baseline to discharge. Kidney function will be evaluated at baseline
prior to surgery, and daily if biochemical tests are done by using RIFLE and AKIN
classifications (117).  BUN and creatinine values will also be recorded daily if available.
If more than one value was obtained, the            highest will be recorded. Renal complications
such as anuria and dialysis will be recorded.
        Figure 1. Rifle Criteria.

        Secondary Aim 2;
          Postoperative pain

    Primary    pain  outcome:  persistent         chronic  pain     will  be  presence  of  persistent
incisional   pain (i.e., any pain) at 3 months after surgery.               Patients will be evaluated
postoperatively by phone at 3 months for quality of life using SF-12 Health Survey (SF-
12), and evaluated for        persistent incisional pain (yes/no). If the patient indicates any
incisional pain they will be asked to rate their pain using a numeric rating pain scale (0-
10).

    Secondary chronic pain outcomes will include,the modified brief pain inventory (BPI),
Sleep Interference scale        and the Neuropathic Pain Questionnaire Short Form (NPQ-
SM), evaluated at 3 months after surgery.
    The BPI is a practical method of evaluating pain severity and its impact on patient
function.  The  Neuropathic  Pain  Questionnaire,  a  clinical  tool  with  the  ability  to
differentiate neuropathic from other types             of pain.(119,120)       The Sleep Interference

        1/12/2016                                                                                         18

scale will describe how the pain will interfere with the patient’s sleep during the previous
24 hours.
    Acute pain and early opioid consumption. The total amount of opioid administration
during surgery, and for the first 3 postoperative days will be recorded. Pain scores will
be  evaluated for  the  first     5   postoperative  days.    Besides  assessing  the effects of
dexmedetomidine on acute pain score and opioid consumption, we will also correlate
these measures with chronic persistent pain.

        Specific Aim 3;
        Cost-effectiveness of Dexmedetomidine after cardiac surgery
        Billing data for all patients will be collected. These will include                 billing data of
patients   receiving      dexmedetomidine   and   those   not   receiving   the   medication.
Additionally, the billing data of those within each treatment group with and without atrial
fibrillation will be compared.  This data will enable the costs directly attributable to the
use  of  Dexmedetomidine  to  be  compared.    To further  validate  the  results,                   clinical
outcomes including LOS (ICU and floor), discharge destination, QOL from the SF12 and
mortality will be collected and valued in line with Medicare reimbursement rates and
societies willingness to pay for a quality adjusted life year (QALY) (125).

Limitations
        A limitation of the current study design relates to the arbitrarily chosen dose of
the dexmedetomidine. However, the dose we have selected according to the most
preferred regimens used in the literature and also in preliminary studies. Furthermore,
surgical   and   anesthesia   team   are   very   worried   with   side   effects   related   to
dexmedetomidine due to hemodynamic effects. While research personnel blinded to
group  assignments  will  collect  intra-post  operative  data,  they  may  recognize  the
randomized drug due to prominent hemodynamic effects. We will ensure the blindness
of the research personnel who will be doing the follow-ups by not getting them involved
with other parts of the study.
        Data Analysis
        Randomized groups will be compared for balance on all                   potentially confounding
baseline variables using descriptive statistics and the standardized difference, which is
the  difference  in  means  or  proportions  divided  by  the  pooled  standard  deviation.
Criterion for balance will be an absolute standardized difference less than sqrt(2/n),
where n is the number of patents per group.(126) Any imbalanced baseline variables
will be adjusted for in all analyses below.           Data transformations will be made or non-
parametric analyses used to meet model assumptions, as appropriate. Analyses will be
intent to treat, with a significance level of 0.05 for each hypothesis.

Specific    Primary     Aim 1.     New onset atrial arrhythmia. We will assess the relative
efficacy of dexmedetomidine to placebo on incidence of any new onset atrial arrhythmia
(the primary outcome, as defined above) using either Pearson chi-square test or logistic

        1/12/2016                                                                                         19

regression if there is a need to adjust for baseline imbalance in potentially confounding
variables.  In either case, the relative risk of developing any arrhythmia during the
follow-up period and its 95% confidence interval will be estimated.
Specific    Primary    Aim    2.  Delirium. We will compare the randomized groups on the
presence of delirium detected at any time before hospital discharge as determined by
CAM-ICU      using either Pearson chi-square test or else logistic regression if there is a
need to adjust for any baseline imbalance in potentially confounding variables.  In either
case, the relative risk of developing delirium and its 95% confidence interval will                      be
estimated.

Specific Secondary Aim 1. Kidney function. We will compare the randomized groups
on the    change    in RIFLE classification from baseline to hospital discharge using a
generalized  linear  mixed  effects  model  with  random  slope  over  time  and  using                    a
cumulative logit link function to model the ordinal nature of the RIFLE data. In essence
we will compare the randomized groups on the mean slope over time in kidney function
status as measured by the RIFLE classification while adjusting for baseline RIFLE
classification as a covariate, along with any baseline imbalanced variables.

Specific    Secondary        Aim    2.   Persistent  incisional  pain.         We  will  compare  the
randomized groups on presence of persistent incisional pain (i.e., any pain) at 3 months
after surgery using either Pearson chi-square test or else logistic regression if there is a
need to adjust for any baseline imbalance in potentially confounding variables.  In either
case,  the  relative  risk  of  having      persistent  incisional  pain     and  its  95%  confidence
interval will be estimated.
        Randomized groups will further be compared on                    the   secondary chronic pain
outcomes using either t-tests or analysis of covariance to adjust for imbalanced baseline
variables.

Specific Secondary Aim 3.
        A  decision  analytic  model  will  be  built  using  TreeAge  to  compare  the  cost-
effectiveness of Dexmedetomidine in cardiac surgery as compared to existing practice.
The model will be developed from two perspectives; the payer perspective and the
societal perspective.  The payer          perspective model will include all costs (positive and
negative)  with  an  impact  to  the  payer.    The  model  will  include  the  entire  study
population and be extrapolated to hospital level and US population level.  The model will
also incorporate 5 year time horizon changes to reflect the changes in the population
and payer mix due to the increasing number of Medicare beneficiaries and healthcare
changes with the Affordability Care Act.
        The societal perspective model will include all costs (positive and negative) with
an impact to society.  This model will use parameters including discharge destination,
QOL and mortality.  This model will also include the entire study population and be
extrapolated to the hospital level, US population level and forecast for a                    5-year time
horizon.  Sensitivity analysis on both models will be performed to ensure robustness of
the results to changes within the model parameters.

        1/12/2016                                                                                         20

        Interim analyses.  At each 17% of the maximum enrollment of N=965 patients,
an interim analysis will be conducted in which we assess for efficacy and futility of
dexmedetomidine versus placebo on each of the outcomes in Aims 1-4.  However,
decision making to stop or continue the trial will be based on the primary outcome in
Aim 1.  We will use the gamma spending function (129) with parameters -3 and -1 for
alpha (efficacy) and beta (futility), respectively.
        SAS statistical software, Cary, NC, and East interim monitoring software, Cytel
Inc, will be used for all analyses.

        Sample Size Considerations.  Sample size is based on the primary outcome in
Aim 1, atrial arrhythmia. According to previous reports and our own cardiac registry data
we expect approximately 30% of the patients having CABG and 40% of the patients
having  valvular  surgery        to  develop     an   atrial  arrhythmia.  We  therefore  assume  an
incidence of approximately 0.35 in the control group for calculating a sample size for
Aim 1.     Based on our preliminary study we                 expect a     30%    relative   reduction in the
percent of patients developing atrial arrhythmias with dexmedetomidine infusion. With a
maximum        sample  size  of      N=965      patients  we  will  have  90%  power  at  the  0.05
significance level to detect a relative risk of 0.70 or stronger given a control group
incidence  of  0.35.  The       expected       sample  size  following  the  above-specified  group
sequential design with 6 interim analyses is N=591 patients.

        Table 1 below gives the P-value boundaries under the null (H0) and alternative
(H1) hypotheses in columns 5 and 6.  The last 3 columns give the boundary crossing
probabilities.  For example, if the specified treatment effect is the true treatment effect in
the  population  sampled,  the  probabilities  of  crossing  either  and  efficacy  or  futility
boundary are listed in the column “Under H1”, and would be a cumulative 6%, 21%,
46%, 71%, 89% and 100% for interim analyses 1 through 6, corresponding to total N of
328, 483, 644, 805 and 965.  In other words, there is a very large probability of crossing
a boundary and thus stopping the trial before the maximum sample size, and 71%
chance by N=644.  If either the treatment effect of the incidence of atrial arrhythmias are
larger  than  planned,  the  probability  of  crossing  an  earlier  boundary  will  increase
accordingly.

Table 1.  P-value boundaries and boundary-crossing probabilities

Information    Cumulative                                           P-value Boundaries            Boundary Crossing Probabilities
Fraction       Accrual      Alpha Spent    Beta Spent               H0              H1   Under H0    Under H1      Under H1/2

         0.167          161          0.002           0.011          0.0017     0.9703       0.031             0.055          0.031

         0.333          328          0.005           0.023          0.0032     0.8978       0.101             0.158          0.081

          0.5           483          0.009           0.038          0.0061     0.661        0.278             0.243          0.178

         0.667          644          0.017           0.055          0.0114     0.3117       0.334             0.249          0.242
         0.833          805          0.029           0.076          0.0211     0.1232       0.178             0.189          0.246

           1            965           0.05            0.1           0.0383     0.0383       0.078             0.105          0.221

        1/12/2016                                                                                             21

                                                References

    1.  Chrysostomou  C,  Schmitt          CG.  Dexmedetomidine:  sedation,  analgesia  and
        beyond. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2008;4:619-27.
    2.  Riker RR, Shehabi Y, Bokesch PM, Ceraso D, Wisemandle W, Koura F, Whitten
        P, Margolis BD, Byrne DW, Ely EW, Rocha MG. Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam
        for sedation of critically ill patients: a randomized trial. JAMA 2009;301:489-99.
    3.  Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, Maze M, Girard TD, Miller RR, Shintani
        AK, Thompson JL, Jackson JC, Deppen SA, Stiles RA, Dittus RS, Bernard GR,
        Ely EW. Effect of sedation with dexmedetomidine vs lorazepam on acute brain
        dysfunction   in   mechanically   ventilated   patients:   the   MENDS   randomized
        controlled trial. JAMA 2007;298:2644-53.
    4.  Maze M, Scarfini C, Cavaliere F. New agents for sedation in the intensive care
        unit. Crit Care Clin 2001;17:881-97.
    5.  Carollo  DS,  Nossaman  BD,  Ramadhyani  U.  Dexmedetomidine:  a  review  of
        clinical applications. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21:457-61.
    6.  Willigers   HM,   Prinzen   FW,   Roekaerts   PM,   de   Lange   S,   Durieux   ME.
        Dexmedetomidine decreases perioperative myocardial lactate release in dogs.
        Anesth Analg 2003;96:657-64.
    7.  Hashimoto K, Ilstrup DM, Schaff HV. Influence of clinical and hemodynamic
        variables on risk of supraventricular tachycardia after coronary artery bypass. J
        Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:56-65.
    8.  Snapir A, Posti J, Kentala E, Koskenvuo J, Sundell J, Tuunanen H, Hakala K,
        Scheinin H, Knuuti J, Scheinin M. Effects of low and high plasma concentrations
        of dexmedetomidine on myocardial perfusion and cardiac function in healthy
        male subjects. Anesthesiology 2006;105:902-10.
    9.  Jalonen  J,  Hynynen  M,  Kuitunen  A,  Heikkila  H,  Perttila  J,  Salmenpera  M,
        Valtonen M, Aantaa R, Kallio A. Dexmedetomidine as an anesthetic adjunct in
        coronary artery bypass grafting. Anesthesiology 1997;86:331-45.
    10. Kabukçu HK, Sahin N, Temel             Y, Titiz TA.    Hemodynamics in coronary artery
        bypass  surgery:  effects  of  intraoperative  dexmedetomidine  administration.
        Anaesthesist. 2011;60:427-31.
    11. Kunisawa T, Ueno M, Kurosawa A, Nagashima M, Hayashi D, Sasakawa T,
        Suzuki    A,    Takahata    O,    Iwasaki    H.        Dexmedetomidine    can    stabilize
        hemodynamics and spare anesthetics before cardiopulmonary bypass. J Anesth.
        2011;25:818-22.
    12. Riha H, Kotulak T, Brezina A, Hess L, Kramar P, Szarszoi O, Netuka I, Pirk J.
        Comparison  of  the  effects  of  ketamine-dexmedetomidine                 and  sevoflurane-
        sufentanil   anesthesia   on       cardiac    biomarkers   after      cardiac   surgery:   an
        observational study. Physiol Res. 2011 Dec 20. [Epub ahead of print]

        1/12/2016                                                                                     22

    13. Hammer GB, Drover DR, Cao H, Jackson E, Williams GD, Ramamoorthy C, Van
        Hare GF, Niksch A,  Dubin AM. The effects of dexmedetomidine on cardiac
        electrophysiology in children. Anesth Analg 2008;106:79-83.
    14. Chrysostomou  C,  Beerman  L,  Shiderly  D,  Berry  D,  Morell  VO,  Munoz  R.
        Dexmedetomidine:  a  novel  drug  for  the  treatment  of  atrial  and  junctional
        tachyarrhythmias during the perioperative period for congenital cardiac surgery: a
        preliminary study. Anesth Analg 2008;107:1514-22.
    15. Chrysostomou C,       Sanchez-de-Toledo J,         Wearden P,      Jooste EH,     Lichtenstein
        SE, Callahan PM, Suresh T, O'Malley E, Shiderly D, Haney J, Yoshida M, Orr R,
        Munoz R, Morell VO. Perioperative use of dexmedetomidine is associated with
        decreased incidence of ventricular and supraventricular tachyarrhythmias after
        congenital cardiac operations. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92:964-72.
    16. Kamibayashi T, Mammoto T, Hayashi Y, Yamatodani A, Takada K, Sasaki S,
        Yoshiya I. Further characterization of the receptor mechanism involved in the
        antidysrhythmic    effect    of    dexmedetomidine    on    halothane/epinephrine
        dysrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology 1995;83:1082-9.
    17. Martinez-Comendador JM, Alvarez JR, Mosquera I, Sierra J, Adrio B, Carro JG,
        Fernandez  A,  Bengochea  J.  Preoperative  statin  treatment  reduces  systemic
        inflammatory  response        and  myocardial  damage  in  cardiac  surgery.             Eur  J
        Cardiothorac Surg. 2009 Dec;36(6):998-1005.
    18. Anselmi A, Possati G, Gaudino M. Postoperative inflammatory reaction and atrial
        fibrillation: simple correlation or causation? Ann Thorac Surg 2009;88:326-33
    19. Yared  JP,  Starr  NJ,  Torres  FK,  Bashour  CA,  Bourdakos  G,  Piedmonte  M,
        Michener JA, Davis JA, Rosenberger TE. Effects of single dose, postinduction
        dexamethasone   on   recovery   after   cardiac   surgery.   Ann   Thorac   Surg
        2000;69:1420-4.
    20. Can M, Gul S, Bektas S, Hanci V,            Acikgoz S. Effects of dexmedetomidine or
        methylprednisolone  on  inflammatory  responses  in  spinal  cord  injury.                 Acta
        Anaesthesiol Scand 2009.
    21. Hofer S, Steppan J, Wagner T, Funke B, Lichtenstern C, Martin E, Graf BM,
        Bierhaus   A,   Weigand   MA.          Central   sympatholytics   prolong   survival   in
        experimental sepsis. Crit Care 2009;13:R11.
    22. Frumento RJ, Logginidou HG, Wahlander S, Wagener G, Playford HR, Sladen
        RN. Dexmedetomidine infusion is associated with enhanced renal function                    after
        thoracic surgery. J Clin Anesth 2006;18:422-6.
    23. Tasdogan M, Memis D, Sut N, Yuksel M. Results of a pilot study on the effects of
        propofol and dexmedetomidine on inflammatory                responses and intraabdominal
        pressure in severe sepsis. J Clin Anesth. 2009; 21:394-400.
    24. Turan, A et al. Dexmedetomidine sedation after cardiac surgery decreases atrial
        arrthmias. Under review.
    25. Ayuka Narisawa, Masaki Nakane, Yu Onodera, Tadahiro Kobayashi, Masahiro
        Iwabuchi,  Mayumi  Yamakawa,  Kaneyuki  Kawamae,                    Can  Dexmedetomidine
        Reduce Atrial Fibrillation after Cardiovascular Surgery? A 107 Abstract, ASA
        meeting Chicago 2011.

        1/12/2016                                                                                     23

    26. Maldonado J, van der Starre P, Wysong A. Post-operative delirium sedation and
        the  incidence  of  ICU  delirium  in  cardiac  surgery  patients.              Anesthesiology.
        Psychosomatics. 2009 May-Jun;50(3):206-17.
    27. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6040a1.htm

    28. DeFrances  CJ,  Lucas  CA,  Vuie  VC,  Golosinskiy  A.               2006  National  Hospital
        Discharge Survey. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 2008.
    29. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; [Accessed February 24, 2010].
        Inpatient Hospital Payment Information for Value-Driven Health Care. Available
        at: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HealthCareConInit/02_Hospital.asp.
    30. Almassi GH, Schowalter T, Nicolosi AC, Aggarwal A, Moritz TE, Henderson WG,
        Tarazi R, Shroyer AL, Sethi GK, Grover FL, Hammermeister KE. Atrial fibrillation
        after cardiac surgery: a major morbid event? Ann Surg. 1997; 226:501-11.
    31. Aranki SF, Shaw DP, Adams DH, Rizzo RJ, Couper GS, VanderVliet M, Collins
        JJ Jr,  Cohn LH,     Burstin HR.     Predictors of atrial fibrillation after coronary artery
        surgery. Current trends and impact on hospital resources. Circulation. 1996 Aug
        1; 94:390-7.
    32. Villareal  RP,   Hariharan  R,     Kiu  BC,    et  al. Postoperative  atrial  fibrillation    and
        mortality after coronary artery bypass surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 43:742-
        748.
    33. Shen  J,  Lall  S,  Zheng  V,  et  al.  The  persistent  problem  of  new-onset
        postoperative atrial fibrillation: a single-institution experience over two decades. J
        Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 141:559-70.
    34. Roach GW, Kanchuger M, Mangano CM et al. Adverse cerebral outcomes after
        coronary bypass surgery. Multicenter study of perioperative ischemia research
        group and the ischemia research and education foundation investigators. N Engl
        J Med 1996; 1857-1863.
    35. Bucerius J, Gummert JF, Borger MA, Walther T, Doll N, Falk V, et al. Predictors
        of delirium:effect of beatingheart (off-pump) surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
        2004;127:57-64.
    36. Echahidi    N,  Pibarot  P,  O'Hara  G,  Mathieu  P.         Mechanisms,  prevention,  and
        treatment of atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol.             2008 Feb
        26;51:793-801.
    37. Aranki SF, Shaw DP, Adams DH, Rizzo RJ, Couper GS, VanderVliet M, Collins
        JJ Jr, Cohn LH, Burstin HR.          Predictors of atrial fibrillation after coronary artery
        surgery. Current trends and impact on hospital resources. Circulation. 1996 Aug
        1; 94:390-7.
    38. Attaran S, Saleh HZ, Shaw M, Ward A, Pullan M, Fabri BM. Does the outcome
        improve after    radiofrequency ablation for atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing
        cardiac surgery? A propensity-matched comparison.                  Eur J Cardiothorac Surg.
        2012 Apr;41(4):806-11.
    39. Kaw R, Hernandez AV, Masood I, Gillinov AM, Saliba W, Blackstone EH. Short-
        and long-term mortality associated with new-onset atrial fibrillation after coronary
        artery  bypass  grafting:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.                  J  Thorac
        Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 141:1305-12.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       24

    40. Kalavrouziotis D, Buth KJ, Ali IS. The impact of new-onset atrial fibrillation on in-
        hospital mortality following cardiac surgery. Chest 2007; 131:833– 839.
    41. Mathew JP, Fontes ML, Tudor IC, Ramsay J, Duke P, Mazer CD, Barash PG,
        Hsu PH, Mangano DT; Investigators of the Ischemia                   Research and Education
        Foundation,  Multicenter  Study  of  Perioperative           Ischemia  Research  Group.  A
        multicenter  risk  index  for  atrial    fibrillation after  cardiac  surgery.      JAMA    2004;
        291:1720 –1729.
    42. Albahrani MJ, Swaminathan M, Phillips-Bute B, Smith PK, Newman MF, Mathew
        JP, Stafford-Smith M. Postcardiac surgery complications:                  association of acute
        renal dysfunction and atrial fibrillation. Anesth Analg 2003; 96:637– 643.
    43. Andersson B, Nilsson J, Brandt J, Höglund P, Andersson R. Gastrointestinal
        complications after cardiac surgery. Br J Surg 2005; 92:326–333.
    44. Mariscalco G, Klersy C, Zanobini M, Banach M, Ferrarese S, Borsani P, et al.
        Atrial fibrillation after isolated coronary surgery affects late survival. Circulation.
        2008; 118:1612-8.
    45. Ahlsson AJ, Bodin L, Fengsrud E, Englund A. Patients with postoperative atrial
        fibrillation have a doubled cardiovascular mortality. Scand Cardiovasc J. 2009;
        43:330-6.
    46. Taylor GJ, Mikell  FL, Moses W, et al: Determinants of hospital charges for
        coronary artery bypass surgery: The economic consequences of postoperative
        complications. Am J Cardiol 1990; 65:309-313.
    47. Mauldin PD, Weintraub WS, Becker ER: Predicting hospital costs for first time
        coronary artery bypass grafting from preoperative and postoperative variables.
        Am J Cardiol 1994; 74:772-775.
    48. Kowey PR, Dalessando DA, Herbertson R, et al: Effectiveness of digitalis with or
        without acebutolol in preventing atrial arrhythmias after coronary artery surgery.
        Am J Cardiol 1997; 79:1114-1117.
    49. Ad N, Snir E, Vidne BA, Golomb E. Potential preoperative markers for the risk of
        developing atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
        1999; 11:308-13.
    50. GU Song, SU Pi-xiong, LIU Yan, YAN Jun, ZHANG Xi-tao and WANG Tian-you.
        Low-dose amiodarone for the prevention of atrial fibrillation after coronary artery
        bypass grafting in patients older than 70 years. Chin Med J 2009;122(24):2928-
        2932
    51. Ishii Y, Schuessler RB, Gaynor SL, et al. Inflammation of atrium after cardiac
        surgery  is  associated  with  inhomogeneity  of  atrial  conduction  and  atrial
        fibrillation. Circulation 2005; 111:2881– 8.
    52. Tselentakis EV, Woodford E, Chandy J, Gaudette GR, Saltman AE. Inflammation
        effects on the electrical properties of atrial tissue and inducibility of post-operative
        atrial fibrillation. J Surg Res 2006; 135:68–75.
    53. Lamm G, Auer J, Weber T, Berent R, Ng C, Eber B. Post-operative white blood
        cell count predicts atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc
        Anesth 2006; 20:51– 6.
    54. Kaireviciute D, Blann AD, Balakrishnan B, Lane DA, Patel JV, Uzdavinys G,
        Norkunas G, Kalinauskas G, Sirvydis V, Aidietis A, Lip GY. Characterisation and
        validity  of  inflammatory  biomarkers  in  the  prediction  of  post-operative              atrial

        1/12/2016                                                                                        25

        fibrillation in coronary artery disease patients. Thromb Haemost. 2010;104:122-7.
    55. Marcus GM, Whooley MA, Glidden DV, Pawlikowska L,                        Zaroff JG, Olgin JE:
        Interleukin-6 and atrial fibrillation in patients with coronary artery disease: Data
        from the Heart and Soul Study. Am Heart J 2008;155:303-309.

    56. Aviles  RJ,  Martin  DO,  Apperson-Hansen  C,  Houghtaling  PL,  Rautaharju  P,
        Kronmal RA, et al. Inflammation as a risk factor for atrial fibrillation. Circulation.
        2003; 108:3006–10.

    57. Stamou SC, Dangas G, Hill PC, Pfister AJ, Dullum MK, Boyce SW, et al. Atrial
        fibrillation after beating heart surgery. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86:64–7.
    58. Chaldoupi SM, Loh P, Hauer RN, de                 Bakker JM, van Rijen HV: The role of
        connexin40 in atrial fibrillation. Cardiovasc Res 2009; 84:15-23.
    59. Dieleman   JM,   van   Paassen   J,   van   Dijk   D,   Arbous   MS,   Kalkman   CJ,
        Vandenbroucke   JP,   van   der   Heijden   GJ,   Dekkers   OM.                     Prophylactic
        corticosteroids    for cardiopulmonary bypass in adults.Cochrane Database Syst
        Rev. 2011 May 11;(5):CD005566.
    60. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, Rovere ME, Gandino A, Cemin R, Ferrua S,
        Belli R, Maestroni S, Simon C, Zingarelli E, Barosi A, Sansone F, Patrini D, Vitali
        E, Trinchero R, Spodick DH, Adler Y; COPPS Investigators. Colchicine reduces
        postoperative atrial fibrillation: results of the Colchicine for the Prevention of the
        Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (COPPS)                 atrial fibrillation substudy.     Circulation.
        2011 Nov 22;124(21):2290-5.
    61. Girerd N,    Pibarot P,    Daleau P,     Voisine P,    O'Hara G,     Després JP,      Mathieu P.
        Statins Reduce Short-        and Long-Term Mortality Associated With Postoperative
        Atrial Fibrillation After Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting: Impact of Postoperative
        Atrial Fibrillation and Statin Therapy on         Survival. Clin Cardiol. 2012 Jan 25. doi:
        10.1002/clc.21008.
    62. Dyer CB, Ashton CM, Teasdale TA. Postoperative delirium. A review of 80
        primary data-collection studies. Arch Intern Med 1995 Mar 13;155 (5):461–5.

    63. Siddiqi N, Stockdale R, Britton AM, Holmes J. Interventions for preventing
        delirium in hospitalised patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
        2007;2(CD005563).

    64. Robinson TN, Eiseman B. Postoperative delirium in the elderly: diagnosis and
        management. Clin Interv Aging 2008;3(2):351–5.

    65. Koster S, Oosterveld FG, Hensens AG,Wijma A, van der Palen J. Delirium after
        cardiac surgery and predictive validity of a risk checklist. Ann Thorac Surg 2008
        Dec;86(6):1883–7.

    66. van der Mast RC, Huyse FJ, Rosier PF. Guideline ‘Delirium’. Ned Tijdschr
        Geneeskd 2005 May 7;149(19):1027–32.

    67. Chang YL, Tsai YF, Lin PJ, Chen MC, Liu CY. Prevalence and risk factors for
        postoperative delirium in a cardiovascular intensive care unit. Am J Crit Care
        2008 Nov;17(6):567–75.

        1/12/2016                                                                                        26

    68. Rudolph JL, Babikian VL, Birjiniuk V, et al. Atherosclerosis is associated with
        delirium   after    coronary   artery   bypass   graft   surgery.   J   Am   Geriatr   Soc
        2005;53:462-466.
    69. Rudolph  JL,  Jones  RN,  Grande  LJ,  et  al.  Impaired  executive  function  is
        associated with delirium after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. J Am Geriatr
        Soc 2006;54:937-941.
    70. Edelstein DM, Aharonoff GB, Karp A, et al.              Effect of postoperative delirium on
        outcome after hip fracture. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2004:195-200.
    71. Franco K, Litaker D, Locala J, Bronson D. The cost of delirium in the                     surgical
        patient. Psychosomatics 2001;42:68-73.
    72. Kalisvaart KJ, de Jonghe JF, Bogaards MJ, et al. Haloperidol prophylaxis for
        elderly hip-surgery patients at risk for delirium: a randomized placebo-controlled
        study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:1658-1666.
    73. Parikh  SS,  Chung  F.  Postoperative  delirium  in  the  elderly.  Anesth  Analg
        1995;80:1223-1232.
    74. Zakriya  K,  Sieber  FE,  Christmas  C,  Wenz  JF,  Sr.,  Franckowiak  S.  Brief
        postoperative delirium in hip fracture patients affects functional outcome at three
        months. Anesth Analg 2004;98:1798-1802, table of contents
    75. Inouye SK. Delirium in hospitalized elderly patients: recognition, evaluation, and
        management. Conn Med 1993;57:309-315
    76. Marcantonio E, Ta T, Duthie E, Resnick NM. Delirium severity and psychomotor
        types: their relationship with outcomes after hip fracture repair. J Am Geriatr Soc
        2002; 50:850-857
    77. Fong HK, Sands LP, Leung JM. The role of postoperative analgesia in delirium
        and  cognitive  decline  in  elderly  patients: a  systematic  review.            Anesth  Analg
        2006;102:1255-1266
    78. Lynch EP, Lazor MA, Gellis JE, et al. The impact of postoperative pain on the
        development of postoperative delirium. Anesth Analg 1998;86:781-785
    79. Morrison RS, Magaziner J, Gilbert M, et al. Relationship between pain and opioid
        analgesics on the development of delirium following hip fracture. J Gerontol A
        Biol Sci Med Sci 2003;58:76-81
    80. Shigeta H, Yasui A, Nimura Y, et al. Postoperative delirium and melatonin levels
        in elderly patients. Am J Surg 2001;182:449-454
    81. Walzer TA, Herrmann M. [Neuropsychological and psychopathologic changes
        following cardiac surgical procedures]. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr 1998;66:68-83
    82. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, et al. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in
        mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA 2004;291:1753-
        1762
    83. Bowman AM. Sleep satisfaction, perceived pain and acute confusion in elderly
        clients undergoing orthopaedic procedures. J Adv Nurs 1997;26:550-564
    84. Duggleby W, Lander J. Cognitive status and postoperative pain: older adults. J
        Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:19-27

        1/12/2016                                                                                       27

    85. Johns MW, Large AA, Masterton JP, Dudley HA. Sleep and delirium after open
        heart surgery. Br J Surg 1974;61:377-381
    86. Shehabi Y, Grant P, Wolfenden H, Hammond N,                 Bass F, Campbell M, Chen J.
        Prevalence of delirium with dexmedetomidine compared with morphine based
        therapy after cardiac surgery: a randomized controlled trial (DEXmedetomidine
        COmpared      to      Morphine-DEXCOM      Study).                 Anesthesiology.         2009
        Nov;111(5):1075-84.
    87. Rosner MH, Portilla D, Okusa MD. Cardiac surgery as a cause of acute kidney
        injury: pathogenesis and potential therapies.         J Intensive Care Med. 2008; 23:3–
        18.
    88. Braz  LG,  Braz  JR,  Castiglia  YM,  Vianna  PT,  Vane  LA,  Modolo  NS,  do
        Nascimento  P,  Jr.,  da  Silva  AL,  Kinsky  MP.            Dexmedetomidine  alters  the
        cardiovascular response       during infra-renal aortic cross-clamping in sevoflurane-
        anesthetized dogs. J Invest Surg 2008;21:360-8.
    89. Kulka PJ, Tryba M, Zenz M. Preoperative alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists
        prevent the deterioration of renal function after cardiac surgery: results                  of a
        randomized, controlled trial. Crit Care Med 1996;24:947-52.
    90. Herr DL, Sum-Ping ST, England M. ICU sedation after coronary artery bypass
        graft    surgery:    dexmedetomidine-based    versus    propofol-based    sedation
        regimens. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2003;17:576-84.
    91. Frumento RJ, Logginidou HG, Wahlander S, Wagener G, Playford HR, Sladen
        RN. Dexmedetomidine infusion is associated with enhanced renal function after
        thoracic surgery. J Clin Anesth 2006;18:422-6.
    92. Kayhan  Z,  Aldemir  D,  Mutlu  H,  Ogus  E.  Which  is  responsible  for  the
        haemodynamic  response  due  to  laryngoscopy  and  endotracheal  intubation?
        Catecholamines, vasopressin or angiotensin? Eur J Anaesthesiol 2005;22:780-5.
    93. Leino  K,    Hynynen  M,      Jalonen  J,    Salmenperä  M,        Scheinin  H,     Aantaa  R;
        Dexmedetomidine   in   Cardiac   Surgery   Study   Group.                 Renal   effects   of
        dexmedetomidine during coronary artery bypass surgery: a randomized placebo-
        controlled study. BMC Anesthesiol. 2011 May 23; 11:9.
    94. Billings FTt, Chen SW, Kim M, Park SW, Song JH, Wang S, Herman J, D'Agati
        V,  Lee  HT.  alpha2-Adrenergic  agonists  protect  against  radiocontrast-induced
        nephropathy in mice. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2008;295:741-8.
    95. Camara NO, Martins JO, Landgraf RG, Jancar S. Emerging roles for eicosanoids
        in renal diseases. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2009;18:21-7.
    96. Jensen BO, Rasmussen LS, Steinbruchel DA: Cognitive outcomes in elderly
        high-risk patients 1 year after off-pump versus on-pump coronary artery bypass
        grafting. A randomized trial.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2008, 34:1016-1021.
    97. Newman MF, Kirchner JL, Phillips-Bute B, Gaver V, Grocott H, Jones RH, Mark
        DB,  Reves  JG,  Blumenthal  JA:           Longitudinal  assessment  of  neurocognitive
        function after coronary-artery bypass surgery.
The New England journal of
        medicine 2001, 344:395-402.
    98. Mackensen  GB:        Cerebral  dysfunction      -  Pathophysiology  of  central  nervous
        functions.
Appl Cardiopulm Pathophysiol 2009, 13:146-147.

        1/12/2016                                                                                     28

    99. Phillips-Bute B, Mathew JP, Blumenthal JA, Grocott HP, Laskowitz DT, Jones
        RH, Mark DB, Newman MF: Association of neurocognitive function and quality of
        life 1 year after coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
Psychosomatic
        medicine 2006, 68:369-375.
    100. Macrae WA: Chronic pain after surgery. Br J Anaesth 2001; 87: 88-98.
    101.        Katz J, Seltzer Z. Transition from acute to chronic postsurgical pain: risk
        factors and protective factors. Expert Rev Neurother 2009;9:723-44.
    102. Seltzer  Z,  Beilin  BZ,  Ginzburg  R,  Paran  Y,           Shimko  T.  The  role  of  injury
        discharge in the induction of neuropathic pain behavior in rats. Pain 1991;46:327-
        36.
    103.        Kehlet  H.  Acute  pain  control  and  accelerated  postoperative  surgical
        recovery. Surg Clin North Am 1999;79:431-43.
    104. Perkins FM,      Kehlet H.    Chronic pain as an outcome of surgery. A review of
        predictive factors. Anesthesiology. 2000;93:1123-33.
    105. Bertrand  PC,  Regnard  JF,  Spaggiari  L,  Levi  JF,  Magdeleinat  P,  Guibert
        L,Levasseur  P:  Immediate  and  long-term  results  after  surgical  treatment  of
        primary spontaneous pneumothorax by VATS. Ann Thorac Surg 1996; 61:1641–
        5.
    106. Katz  J,  Jackson  M,  Kavanagh  BP,  Sandler  AN:  Acute  pain  after  thoracic
        surgery predicts long-term post-thoracotomy pain. Clin J Pain 1996; 12:50–5.
    107. Perttunen K, Tasmuth T, Kalso E: Chronic pain after thoracic surgery: A follow-
        up study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1999; 43:563–7.
    108. Taillefer  MC,     Carrier  M,    Bélisle  S,   Levesque  S,      Lanctôt  H,    Boisvert  AM,
        Choinière M.     Prevalence, characteristics, and predictors of chronic nonanginal
        postoperative pain after a cardiac operation: a cross-sectional study.                 J Thorac
        Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Jun;131(6):1274-80.
    109.   Irina Grosu and Patricia Lavand’homme. Use of dexmedetomidine for pain
        control. F1000 Medicine Reports 2010, 2:90 (doi:10.3410/M2-90).
    110. Massad IM, Mohsen WA, Basha AS, Al-Zaben KR, Al-Mustafa MM, Alghanem
        SM:   A  balanced  anesthesia  with  dexmedetomidine  decreases  postoperative
        nausea and vomiting after laparoscopic surgery.              Saudi Med J. 2009,        30:1537–
        41.
    111. Al-Zaben KR, Qudaisat IY, Al-Ghanem SM, Massad IM, Al-Mustafa MM, Al-
        Oweidi   AS,   Abu-Halaweh   SA,   Abu-Ali   HM,   Saleem   MM:                   Intraoperative
        administration  of  dexmedetomidine  reduces  the  analgesic  requirements  for
        children undergoing hypospadias surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2010, 27:247–52.
    112. Unlugenc  H,  Gunduz  M,  Guler            T,  Yagmur  O,  Isik  G:       The  effect  of  pre-
        anaesthetic  administration  of  intravenous  dexmedetomidine  on  postoperative
        pain in patients receiving patient-controlled morphine. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2005,
        22:386–91.
    113.        Sessler  CN,  Gosnell  MS,  Grap  MJ,  et  al.  The  Richmond  Agitation-
        Sedation Scale: validity and reliability in adult intensive care unit patients.             Am J
        Respir Crit Care Med. Nov 15 2002;166(10):1338-1344.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       29

    114.        Ely EW, Truman B, Shintani A, et al. Monitoring sedation status over time
        in ICU patients: reliability and validity of the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale
        (RASS). Jama. Jun 11 2003;289(22):2983-2991.
    115.        Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, et al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated
        patients:  validity  and  reliability  of  the  confusion  assessment  method  for  the
        intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). Jama. Dec 5 2001;286(21):2703-2710.
    116.        Zou Y, Cole MG, Primeau FJ, McCusker J, Bellavance F, Laplante J.
        Detection  and  diagnosis  of  delirium  in  the  elderly:  psychiatrist  diagnosis,
        confusion assessment method, or consensus diagnosis? Int Psychogeriatr. Sep
        1998;10(3):303-308.
    117.        Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA, Mehta RL, Palevsky P; Acute Dialysis
        Quality Initiative workgroup. Acute renal failure          - definition, outcome measures,
        animal  models,  fluid  therapy  and  information  technology  needs:  the  Second
        International  Consensus  Conference            of  the  Acute  Dialysis  Quality  Initiative
        (ADQI) Group. Crit Care. 2004 Aug;8(4):R204-12.
    118.        Daut RL, Cleeland CS, Flanery RC. Development of the Wisconsin Brief
        Pain  Questionnaire  to  assess  pain  in  cancer  and                 other  diseases.  Pain
        Med1983;17:197-210.
    119.        Backonja MM, Krause SJ. Neuropathic pain questionnaire--short form.
        Clin J Pain2003;19:315-6.
    120.        Krause   SJ,   Backonja   MM.   Development   of   a   neuropathic   pain
        questionnaire. Clin J Pain2003;19:306-14.
    121. Jitapunkul S,      Pillay I, Ebrahim S.      The abbreviated mental test: its use and
        validity. Age Ageing. 1991 Sep;20(5):332-6.
    122. Baker GA, Austin NA, Downes JJ. Validation of the Wechsler Memory Scale-III
        in a population of people with intractable temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Res.
        2003;53:201-6.
    123. Lamberty GJ, Kennedy CM,             Flashman LA.      Clinical utility of the CERAD word
        list memory test. Appl Neuropsychol. 1995 Aug-Nov;2(3-4):170-3.
    124. TOLOR A. A comparison of the Bender-Gestalt Test and the digit-span test as
        measures of recall. J Consult Psychol. 1956 Aug;20(4):305-9.
    125. Drummond MF, Jefferson TO. Guidelines for authors and peer reviewers of
        economic     submissions  to  the  BMJ.  The  BMJ  economic  Evaluation  Working
        Party. BMJ 1996; 313:275-283.
    126. Austin  PC:     Balance  diagnostics  for  comparing  the  distribution  of  baseline
        covariates  between  treatment  groups  in  propensity-score  matched  samples.
        STATISTICS IN MEDICINE 2009, 28(25): 3083-3107.
    127.   Berger  R:    Multiparameter  Hypothesis  Testing  and  Acceptance  Sampling.
        Technometrics 1982, 24:295-300.
    128.        Mascha EJ, Turan A: Joint hypothesis testing and gatekeeping procedures
        for studies with multiple endpoints Anesth Analg (in press) 2012.
    129.        Hwang IK SW, De Cani JS: Group sequential designs using a family of
        type I error probability spending functions.  Statistics in Medicine 1990, 9:1439-
        1445.

        1/12/2016                                                                                       30

         APPENDIX 1
                                               CAM-ICU Worksheet

         copyright 2002, E. Wesley Ely, MD, MPH and Vanderbilt University, all rights reserved.

         1/12/2016                                                                                                  31

          1/12/2016                                                                                                                   32
