Nighttime  Dexmedetomidine  for  Delirium  Prevention  in  Non-Mechanically  Ventilated

Patients after Cardiac Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

                                               DETAILED STUDY PROTOCOL

 Minimizing ICU neurological dysfunction with dexmedetomidine-induced sleep (MINDDS): A randomized
                                                      placebo-controlled trial
Principal Investigator: Oluwaseun Johnson-Akeju, M.D., M.M.Sc
Version: 12/15/2020

1. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE

Delirium is an acute brain dysfunction characterized by disturbances in                   attention, awareness, and cognition not
explained by a preexisting neurocognitive disorder.1 Although the increased mortality rates ascribed to delirium
remain debatable, delirium remains a leading cause of preventable morbidity in hospitalized elderly patients. It is also
associated with prolonged hospitalization, prolonged institutionalization, and long-term cognitive deficits.2-7 Patients
with pre-existing dementia, such as Alzheimer’s disease, are especially vulnerable to developing delirium.8 The total
healthcare cost attributable to delirium is estimated between $143 and $152 billion annually.9 In the United States,
delirium occurs in approximately 80% of critically ill patients admitted to medical/surgical intensive care units (ICU),
10 and 15% of patients admitted to cardiac surgical (CS) ICU.11 Most patients diagnosed with delirium also present
with multiple comorbidities (sepsis, multi-organ failure) that significantly confound our understanding of this disease.2
Thus, to date, no pharmacological intervention to treat delirium has been identified.2 The aging process has been
identified as a risk factor for developing delirium.
Normal aging is associated with a morphological shift of glia (microglia, astrocytes) to an activated state. Following
a systemic challenge such as critical illness, these activated glia aid a neuroinflammatory state that contributes to
delirium.  The  aforementioned  neuroinflammatory  state  is  exacerbated  by  sleep  disturbances.15-17                    Thus,  sleep
deprivation may be a modifiable risk factor for the development of delirium. Presently, pharmacological treatment
with no current medication (benzodiazepines, antipsychotics) induces natural sleep or reliably reduces the incidence
of delirium. We have found that pharmacological induction of rapid eye movement sleep (REM) and non-REM
I-III sleep states using dexmedetomidine, can now be safely achieved in humans. Our overall objective is to
evaluate the efficacy of dexmedetomidine-induced sleep in preventing delirium, investigate cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying delirium, and investigate whether recently described intraoperative electroencephalogram
(EEG) signatures of the aging brain are associated with developing delirium.18 Our central hypothesis is that nightly
biomimetic sleep in elderly patients admitted to the CSICU for > 24hrs will reduce the incidence of ICU delirium.
Our intervention and control groups will be comprised of extubated CSICU patients, because their homogeneity in
terms of surgical procedures, anesthetic management, and systemic inflammatory response represents a unique
opportunity to study the mechanisms underlying delirium, while limiting confounding factors that may otherwise be
encountered in heterogeneous patients found in the medical/surgical ICU. We will perform assessments of cognition
(peri-operative), obtain EEG recordings (intra-operative, ICU) and blood samples (peri-operative).
At the conclusion of these studies, we will have expanded our knowledge of the pathophysiology of delirium,
evaluated  a  new  preemptive  therapeutic strategy  for  delirium,  suggest  neurophysiologically  based  monitoring
strategies to reduce significantly the amount of anesthetic administered to elderly patients – and possibly delirium –
while being certain the patient is sufficiently unconscious for surgery (individualized anesthesia care), and enable
continued investigation into the pathophysiology of this clinically important disorder.
2. SPECIFIC AIMS

                                                                                                                                         1

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

We will pursue three aims. In the first aim, we will investigate the benefits of preemptive biomimetic                      sleep for reducing
the risk of developing delirium in a randomized controlled trial; in the second aim, we will investigate the mechanisms
of delirium using serum metabolic profiling; and in the third aim, we will investigate                          power spectral analyses of
intraoperative and CSICU electroencephalogram dynamics.

Table 1 shows a proposed timeline.
   Table 1: Planned Schedule
   Hypothesis      Short Name                                                       Year 1       Year 2       Year 3       Year 4       Year 5
        1·1        Nightly preemptive biomimetic sleep will reduce the                 ..           ..           ..
                   incidence of delirium
        2·1        Serum metabolic profiling will be sensitive to detect                                         ..           ..
                   neurodegeneration of preclinical delirium
        3·1        Absence of anesthesia-induced frontal alpha                                                   ..           ..           ..
                   oscillations will be associated with delirium
        3·2        Burst-suppression/anesthesia overdose will be                                                 ..           ..           ..
                   associated with delirium

The specific aims of this study are:
AIM  1:     Investigate  the  benefits  of  preemptive  biomimetic  sleep  for  reducing  the  risk  of  delirium  in a
Randomized Controlled Trial.
Hypothesis 1·1. Compared to standard treatments (benzodiazepines, antipsychotics), nightly preemptive biomimetic
sleep will reduce the incidence of ICU delirium.
AIM 2: Investigate mechanisms of delirium using serum metabolic profiling.
Hypothesis 2·1. Unbiased metabolic profiling will be sensitive to detect early signatures of neurodegeneration that
predisposes to the development of delirium.
AIM 3: Investigate power spectral analyses of intraoperative and CSICU electroencephalogram dynamics.
Hypothesis 3·1. The relative absence of anesthesia-induced frontal alpha oscillations (a putative marker of brain
vulnerability) is associated with delirium.
Hypothesis 3·2. Burst-suppression induced by the age-adjusted maintenance anesthetic (a putative marker of
anesthetic overdose and brain vulnerability) is associated with the severity of delirium.

3. STUDY PROCEDURES
Subject Selection: We will aim to enroll 530 patients over a period of three years into a randomized, controlled,
double-blinded, single-site, parallel-arm superiority trial.               Our primary outcome is the incidence of delirium on
postoperative day 1 upon administration of the study intervention. To ensure that the study is appropriately powered
for the primary outcome measure, patients will be recruited and randomized into the study until 370 patients receive
the study intervention on postoperative day 0. Thus, patients will be censored from the study if they do not receive
dexmedetomidine or placebo on postoperative day 0. The cardiac surgical case volume at Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) will enable us to meet our recruitment goals within our projected timeline. Cardiac surgeons, cardiac
intensivists, and anesthesiologists at MGH will identify all potential study participants. This initial care provider-
patient contact will      ensure that eligible patients are comfortable with all study procedures. Once the potential
participant confirms that he/she is comfortable with all study procedures, a copy of the consent form will be made
available. Informed consent for this protocol will follow a two part process. First, a verbal consent will be obtained at
the Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine pre-operative visit. This verbal consent is necessary
to ensure that pre-operative baseline questionnaires can be administered. During this visit, the study protocol will also
be explained to potential participants. In addition, a flyer detailing the study protocol will also be given to potential
study participants. After verbal consent is obtained, the study team will allocate a study identification number, based
on the study stratification schema, to the potential participant. Written consent will be obtained on the morning of
surgery. The research pharmacy will allocate the participant into his/her assigned intervention group according to the
randomization key associated with each study identification number. This key will be provided to the pharmacy by
the study statisticians. All study team members, including the statisticians, and all clinical care providers will be
blinded to the treatment group assignments. All subjects who provide verbal consent and complete the baseline
assessment, but later decline participation in the study, or fail to give signed consent, will not be subject to any study-
related follow-up or intervention. However their baseline assessment, which has already been acquired, may be used

                                                                                                                                                 2

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

to identify factors that may predispose or bias patients toward enrollment. Patients who undergo secondary surgical
procedures after admittance to the CSICU, and/or remain intubated longer than the 12 hours stipulated below, will not
be subject to any further study procedures as they will no l           onger satisfy the primary inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Primary inclusion criteria for patients and controls: (1) age ≥ 60; (2) scheduled for a cardiac surgical procedure
with planned post-operative admission to the CSICU for ≥ 24 hours; (3) scheduled                     same day surgical admission.
Primary exclusion criteria for patients and controls: (1) blind, deafness or the inability to speak English; (2) greater
than 2 days of ICU admission in the month preceding the current surgical procedure; (3) renal and liver fa                               ilure
requiring dialysis or Child-Pugh score > 5; (4) follow-up difficulties (i.e. active substance abuse, psychotic disorder,
homelessness); (5) previous cardiac surgery within 1 year of surgical procedure; (6) allergy to dexmedetomidine;                           (7)
chronic therapy with benzodiazepines and/or antipsychotics; (8) severe deficit due to structural or anoxic brain
damage; (9) surgical procedure requiring total circulatory arrest; (10) SARS                   -CoV-2 positive or SARS-CoV-2-like
symptoms (i.e. fever, sore throat, new cough, new nasal congestion or runny nose, muscle aches, new loss of taste or
smell, shortness of breath).
Primary objective drop criteria for patients and controls:                  (1) Scheduled for a second surgical procedure during
hospital stay; (2) post-operative intubation > 12 hours; (3) SARS-CoV-2 positive or SARS-CoV-2-like symptoms (i.e.
fever, sore throat, new cough, new nasal congestion or runny nose, muscle aches, new loss of taste or smell, shortness
of breath).
Intervention  (dexmedetomidine-induced  sleep  vs.  placebo).                      After  admission  to  the  CSICU,  rewarming,
discontinuation  of  the  sedative/anesthetic  infusion  and  extubation  of  the  airway,  sedative  medications  will be
administered as clinically indicated by the CSICU intensive care physician. Study patients admitted to the CSICU
during the afternoon and extubated by 8:30 PM, would either receive a sleep induction dose of dexmedetomidine
(1mcg/kg over 40 minutes) or placebo (normal saline or D5W over 40 minutes) every night throughout their CSICU
stay. A sustained infusion of dexmedetomidine would never be administered for study related purposes. The targeted
sleep induction time will be 9 PM. For the second start or later surgical cases, study patients admitted to the CSICU
and extubated after 8:30 PM, but before 2 AM, would either receive a sleep induction dose of dexmedetomidine
(1mcg/kg over 40 minutes) or placebo (normal saline or D5W over 40 minutes). The targeted sleep induction time
will be within 30 minutes of extubation, with the earliest administration time being 9 PM. However, throughout the
rest of the CSICU stay the sleep induction time will be targeted for 9 PM. In contrast, those patients who are admitted
to the CSICU and remain intubated past 2 AM will not begin study procedures until postoperative day 1, assuming
they are extubated within 12 hours of admission to the CSICU. The maximum dose of dexmedetomidine that will be
administered for any study participant will be 80mcg over a 40-minute period at any one instance. Nighttime EEG
may be obtained on all participants to enable sleep stage scoring in the spectral domain. The intraoperative EEG data
acquisition system (Sedline) is a four-channel EEG device approved by MGH bioengineering. This device is currently
used in all operating and procedural rooms at MGH for monitoring depth-of-anesthesia. For EEG monitoring in the
ICU we will use the Compumedics Somte Portable PSG monitoring device.
Post cardiac surgical patients that are admitted to the CSICU have implanted temporary pacemakers and are also on a
variety vasoactive medications (including but not limited to: norepinephrine, dobutamine, dopamine, and epinephrine)
to maintain hemodynamic stability. Therefore, the administration of dexmedetomidine in these patients will not unduly
compromise their cardiovascular status. However, patients with active bleeding necessitating surgical intervention
will be excluded from the study.
Outcome measures and variables of interest. The primary outcome measure for this study is the incidence delirium
in the CSICU on post-operative day 1. Secondary outcome measures include ICU- and hospital-delirium/coma-free
days, length of hospital stay, 30-day mortality, 90-day mortality, and 180-day mortality. Variables of interest will
include  age,  sex,  years  of  formal  education,  race,  ethnicity,  marital  status,  chronic  disease  burden  (Charlson
comorbidity index), cerebrovascular disease (Framingham Stroke Risk profile), physical function as assessed by NIH
Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS-29)                               questionnaires,  organ  failure
(Sequential Organ Failure Assessment), length of cardiopulmonary bypass, presence of significant cardiac dysfunction
(ejection fraction less than 35%), and sedative use in the ICU.

                                                                                                                                             3

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

Cognitive testing. We will conduct delirium assessments twice daily (AM and PM with at least 6 hours between tests)
beginning on post-operative day 1 using the Long- Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). Delirium assessments will
be conducted up to day 3 or hospital discharge, whichever               comes first. Patients who remain delirious past day 3 will
be assessed until day 5 or hospital discharge, whichever comes first.               For those patients who remain delirious past day
5, assessments will continue until day 7 or hospital discharge, whichever comes first.
Other Cognitive Testing: Cognitive decline will be estimated by taking into account the patient’s baseline cognitive
function and sleep quality before admission to the ICU, as assessed using the                      PROMIS-29, abbreviated Montreal
cognitive assessment and PROMIS-4A questionnaires scored at recruitment, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months                               . The 3-D
CAM and TPS questionnaire will be administered at baseline. These questionnaires may be administered via email
(RedCap), regular mail, or phone call.
Blood Draws: For all patients, we will acquire peri              -operative blood samples. This will enable us relate the serum
metabolic/inflammatory profile to primary and secondary outcomes. For all study participants, blood sampling                               will
be acquired as follows: (1) up to 40 ml of blood may be acquired at baseline on the day of surgery prior to the induction
of general anesthesia (5-10ml for TSPO genetic profiling);              (2) up to 20 ml of blood may be acquired at approximately
9 am of every ICU stay up to day 5.            We may apply at least three distinct LC           -MS–based methods to study distinct
plasma aliquots for each experimental sample.
Anesthetic management and EEG data acquisition: Intraoperatively, patients will receive standard anesthesia care
in which the anesthesiologist uses age-adjusted drug dosing information, as well as heart rate, and blood pressure to
set and titrate the anesthetic. This portion of the study will follow a strictly observational nature. EEG will be recorded
per clinical practice in all patients using the 4-channel Sedline EEG machine that is installed in all operating rooms at
MGH. In the ICU, EEG may be acquired through the Compumedics Portable PSG monitoring device.
Other data. A member of the study team will review the patient’s bedside nursing log and clinical notes in the patient
chart. A timeline of physiological data (obtained from continuously recorded clinical data in the CSICU), sedatives,
analgesics, as well as any patient events will be recorded for later analysis in relation to outcome measures and
nighttime spectral sleep stage scoring.
4. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN
Data will be analyzed using an intention-to-treat approach defined as all randomized patients who receive an
intervention. Continuous data will be described using median and interquartile range, and categorical data using
frequencies and proportions. The primary outcome will be evaluated using logistic regression examining the presence
or absence of delirium conditional on randomized group assignment. Any randomization imbalances, or other potential
treatment effect modifiers will be further examined as covariates in sensitivity analyses. Secondary analyses will be
evaluated using tests that are appropriate for the             outcomes. We will use Pearson χ2 tests to compare categorical
variables between the 2 study groups and independent t-tests or Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to compare continuous
variables. Time-to-event analyses will be used to compare the effects of dexmedetomidine-induced sleep and normal
care on mortality, CSICU and hospital lengths of stay, CSICU and hospital readmission rates. Kaplan-Meier survival
curves will be used for graphical presentation of these time-to-event analyses and log-rank statistics to assess the
effects of biomimetic sleep and normal care. For mortality analyses, patients will be censored at the time of last contact
alive or days from enrollment, whichever was first. Censoring for CSICU or hospital discharge readiness analyses
will occur time of death or study withdrawal. Two-sided P values of 0·05 or less were considered to indicate statistical
significance. Because missing data rarely occur entirely at random, we will assess the associations between patient
characteristics with respect to missing data. If patients with at least one missing outcome value are different from
those with complete outcomes data, we will use multiple imputation to assign values to missing risk factors and
outcomes in regression modeling.
Metabolite concentrations will be log transformed to reduce heteroscedasticity of case-control differences. Metabolite
levels will be compared in persons who developed delirium versus those who did not using two-tailed t tests. To screen
these associations in the context of the balance of type-I and type-II errors, we will consider both FDR adjusted and
Bonferroni-corrected P value thresholds. For metabolites meeting the less conservative FDR P value threshold, logistic
regression analyses to estimate the OR of developing cognitive deficits will be performed at different metabolite

                                                                                                                                              4

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

values. Metabolites will be analyzed as continuous variables (log transformed and scaled to SD of 1), and regressions
adjusted for age, sex, delirium assessment, CT-ICU length of stay, and surgical duration. To examine the unique
predictive  ability  of  these  metabolites,  we  will  conduct  an  exploratory  stepwise  logistic  model  including  all
metabolites meeting our threshold, and conduct cross              -validation procedures to examine the internal consistency of
these estimates. We will then construct a multimarker score based on the regression coefficients of the metabolites
that were significant and consistent in our multivariable model, and then assess whether a model including clinical
risk factors plus the multimarker panel improves delirium prediction compared with the model including clinical risk
factors only.
All EEG data will be downloaded for             off-line computational analysis. Data will be visualized and analyzed using
signal processing and statistical algorithms available in MatLab, and using algorithms developed in house by the study
investigators. To address hypothesis 3·1, we will employ multitaper power spectral analysis,21 multitaper bivariate
coherence analysis.18      We will also perform phase-amplitude modulation between low and high frequency EEG
components.21 To address hypothesis 3·2, Segmentation of EEG recordings into burst and suppression periods will be
performed in a semi-automated manner using an adaptation of previously described methods.22-24 We will quantify
the depth of burst suppression using the burst suppression probability (BSP), a number between 0 and 1, which
describes the instantaneous probability of the EEG being in a state of suppression. A BSP value of 0 corresponds to a
continuously active EEG with no suppression, whereas a value of 1 corresponds to a completely isoelectric or
suppressed EEG.
5. POWER ANALYSIS
The  primary  objective  of  this  study  is  to  detect  a  difference  in  the  incidence  of  ICU  delirium  between  the
dexmedetomdine-induced sleep and normal care groups. Assuming a delirium event rate of 15%, a type I error of
0·05, and power of 0·90, an n = 185 patients per group will enable us to detect an absolute difference 10% (i.e., 15%
versus 5%). With respect to decreased morbidity and healthcare costs, this change represents a clinically meaningful
difference. Therefore, we will recruit up to 370 patients total            who receive the study intervention on          postoperative day
0.
6. REMUNERATION
Patients will not be compensated for this study.

7. RISK AND DISCOMFORT
Dexmedetomidine risks: The risks involved in the administration of dexmedetomidine include nausea, xerostomia,
atrial fibrillation, and transient hypertension during drug loading. The significant risks involved are directly related to
a drug induced reduction in sympathetic activity, resulting in hypotension and bradycardia. Rare case reports of sinus
arrest in instances of rapid drug administration and in patients with a high resting vagal tone have also been described.
Drug discontinuation, dose reduction, or the use of vasoactive substances causes a return of these hemodynamic
parameters to baseline. All subject hemodynamic parameters will be continuously monitored to ensure that appropriate
medical intervention will be instituted for any clinically significant hypotensive or bradycardic episodes. In addition,
most of our study subjects will have temporary pacemakers in place for routine post surgical heart-rate management.
Since dexmedetomidine maintains the respiratory rate and we are only administering a one                        -time dose (similar to our
recently completed proof of concept study in healthy volunteers;                NCT01485393), there is no concern for respiratory
compromise.

EEG risks: The risks associated with EEG electrodes are redness and irritation at placement site.
Psychological risks: Psychological risks include the possibility of claustrophobia within the scanner.
Questionnaire risks: Minimal risks associated with completing questionnaires are subject fatigue and the possibility
of minor psychological distress associated with answerin             g sensitive questions regarding psychological functioning.
Data risks:     Procedures are in place to reduce the likelihood of a breach of confidentiality including the de                              -
identification of data and storage of data only on partners approved devices/portals. However, there is a small risk that
people outside of this study may be         exposed to information about study subjects.

                                                                                                                                              5

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

8. POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Subjects will have no direct benefit from taking part in this study. Findings from these studies will help advance our
understanding of the pathophysiology of delirium. In particular, this             project will assess the role of sleep induction and
neuroinflammation in the establishment and/or maintenance of delirium. As such, we envision that in the future the
information obtained from the proposed research will enhance the diagnosis and management                        of delirium.

9. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
No identifiers other than study ID’s will be included in the dataset. Thus, all data will be deidentified and data will be
stored on password protected partners computers and cluster for off                   -line analysis.    The proposed study will be
monitored for safety, with monthly staff meetings reviewing adverse events and treatment outcomes and directly
reporting any adverse events. The PI will also routinely monitor and assure the validity and integrity of collected da                    ta
and adherence to the IRB-approved protocol. The trained staff members who carry out the procedures will also
carefully monitor the study throughout its duration. The team will evaluate the progress of the study, verify that the
rights and well being of       the subjects are protected, verify that the reported study data are accurate, complete and
verifiable from source documents, and the conduct of the study is in compliance with the approved protocol and
amendments. Outcome monitoring and adverse events will                 all be reported through appropriate channels of the Human
Studies Committee. A DSMB will also oversee this study.
Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others including adverse events will be reported to the PHRC
in accordance with PHRC unanticipated problems including adverse events reporting guidelines, as well as the RDRC
within 5 days.

10. SUPPLEMENTARY ANALYSIS
In a supplementary analysis data from the MINDDS study will be combined with data and specimens from the
Maximizing trEatment of Neurological Dysfunction using INtravenous Guanfacine (                        MENDING) study in an effort
to help determine future routes of study of the alpha2 agonism on delirium and               acquired-dementia/Alzheimer’s disease
and related dementias (ADRD)          . This collaboration will be established between MGH and Vanderbilt University
Medical Center in order to share data and specimens for analysis.
Briefly, the MENDING trial leverages resources              from three ongoing NIH        -funded trials. Patients in the MENDING
trial have been enrolled into one of the ongoing prospective studies through the                  Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction,
and Survivorship (CIBS) Center at Vanderbilt, all of which have daily delirium monitoring and 3- and 12-month
cognitive assessments. These include the Illuminating Neuropsychological Dysfunction and Systemic Inflammatory
Mechanisms Gleaned After Hospitalization in Trauma-ICU (INSIGHT-ICU) study (R01GM120484, PI: Patel), the
Measuring Outcomes of Activity in Intensive Care (MOSAIC) study (K76AG054864, PI: Brummel); and the Bringing
to light the Risk factors And Incidence of Neuropsychological dysfunction in ICU Survivors, 2nd (BRAIN-ICU-2)
study (R01AG058639, PI: Ely). Patients enrolled into one of these parent observational studies will subsequ                           ently
be consented for enrollment into the MENDING clinical trial, which evaluates the role of                             the alpha-2 agonist
guanfacine. All study procedures for the MENDING trial at Vanderbilt are covered under their local IRB (Protocol
202000). Additionally, the consent for all MENDING studies includes approval to share data and specimens to
evaluate mechanisms and associations with delirium, consistent with the aims of the MINDDS study. Thus, sharing
of specimens and data will be consistent with future use described in the informed consent. Data collected from the
MENDING study will be used in conjunction with neurocognitive data from the MINDDS study in interpreting the
potential of alpha-2 agonism on delirium and ADRD.
All data shared between institutions will be           coded so that the collaborating institution cannot identify individual
participants. This limited dataset will only include dates (of neurocognitive assessments, admission/discharge) and
ages over 89. All other identifiable aspects of data will be removed. No other identifiable information will be shared.
If possible a completely deidentified data set will be shared between institutions. Data and specimen sharing will be
bi-directional in order to study of the alpha2 agonism on delirium. Appropriate data and material transfer agreements
will be obtained between sites prior to sharing of any data or specimens.

                                                                                                                                           6

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

References

1.   American Psychiatric Association., American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5 Task Force. Diagnostic and
     statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5. 5th ed. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association;
     2013.
2.   Maldonado JR. Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current etiologic theories and common pathways. The
     American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry
     2013;21:1190-222.
3.   O'Keeffe S, Lavan J. The prognostic significance of delirium in older hospital patients. Journal of the American
     Geriatrics Society 1997;45:174-8.
4.   McCusker J, Cole MG, Dendukuri N, Belzile E. Does delirium increase hospital stay? Journal of the American
     Geriatrics Society 2003;51:1539-46.
5.   Francis J, Martin D, Kapoor WN. A prospective study of delirium in hospitalized elderly. Jama 1990;263:1097-
     101.
6.   Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al. Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. The New
     England journal of medicine 2013;369:1306-16.
7.   Fong TG, Tulebaev SR, Inouye SK. Delirium in elderly adults: diagnosis, prevention and treatment. Nature
     reviews Neurology 2009;5:210-20.
8.   Gross AL, Jones RN, Habtemariam DA, et al. Delirium and Long-term Cognitive Trajectory Among Persons
     With Dementia. Archives of internal medicine 2012;172:1324-31.
9.   Leslie DL, Marcantonio ER, Zhang Y, Leo-Summers L, Inouye SK. One-year health care costs associated with
     delirium in the elderly population. Archives of internal medicine 2008;168:27-32.
10.  Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion
     Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Critical care medicine 2001;29:1370-9.
11.  Rudolph JL, Inouye SK, Jones RN, et al. Delirium: an independent predictor of functional decline after cardiac
     surgery. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 2010;58:643-9.
12.  Cerejeira J, Firmino H, Vaz-Serra A, Mukaetova-Ladinska EB. The neuroinflammatory hypothesis of delirium.
     Acta neuropathologica 2010;119:737-54.
13.  Norden DM, Godbout JP. Review: microglia of the aged brain: primed to be activated and resistant to regulation.
     Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 2013;39:19-34.
14.  Cunningham C. Systemic inflammation and delirium: important co-factors in the progression of dementia.
     Biochemical Society transactions 2011;39:945-53.
15.  Ingiosi AM, Opp MR, Krueger JM. Sleep and immune function: glial contributions and consequences of aging.
     Current opinion in neurobiology 2013;23:806-11.
16.  Vacas S, Degos V, Feng X, Maze M. The neuroinflammatory response of postoperative cognitive decline. British
     medical bulletin 2013;106:161-78.
17.  Zhu B, Dong Y, Xu Z, et al. Sleep disturbance induces neuroinflammation and impairment of learning and
     memory. Neurobiology of disease 2012;48:348-55.
18.  Purdon PL, Pavone KJ, Akeju O, et al. The Ageing Brain: Age-dependent changes in the electroencephalogram
     during propofol and sevoflurane general anaesthesia. British journal of anaesthesia 2015;115 Suppl 1:i46-i57.
19.  Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, Balkin S, Siegal AP, Horwitz RI. Clarifying confusion: the confusion
     assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. Annals of internal medicine 1990;113:941-8.
20.  Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, et al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of
     the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). Jama 2001;286:2703-10.
21.  Purdon  PL,  Pierce  ET,  Mukamel  EA,  et  al.  Electroencephalogram  signatures  of  loss  and  recovery  of
     consciousness from propofol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:E1142-51.
22.  Brandon Westover M, Shafi MM, Ching S, et al. Real-time segmentation of burst suppression patterns in critical
     care EEG monitoring. Journal of neuroscience methods 2013;219:131-41.
23.  Lewis LD, Ching S, Weiner VS, et al. Local cortical dynamics of burst suppression in the anaesthetized brain.
     Brain : a journal of neurology 2013;136:2727-37.
24.  Brandon Westover M, Ching S, Kumaraswamy VM, et al. The human burst suppression electroencephalogram
     of deep hypothermia. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of Clinical
     Neurophysiology 2015;126:1901-14.

                                                                                                                                         7

Nighttime Dexmedetomidine for Delirium Prevention in Non-Mechanically Ventilated Patients after Cardiac
Surgery: The MINDDS Randomized Controlled Trial (Qu et al.)

25.  Chemali JJ, Wong KF, Solt K, Brown EN. A state-space model of the burst suppression ratio. Conference
     proceedings :  Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society IEEE
     Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Annual Conference 2011;2011:1431-4.
26.  Chemali J, Ching S, Purdon PL, Solt K, Brown EN. Burst suppression probability algorithms: state-space methods
     for tracking EEG burst suppression. Journal of neural engineering 2013;10:056017.

                                                                                                                                       8
