Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients

after  cardiac  surgery  (MINDDS):  a  single-centre,  parallel-arm,  randomised,  placebo-

controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

                                                  SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX

Table of Contents

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 1.                              MINDDS Study Investigators ................................................................ 2
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 2.                              Detailed Study Protocol ......................................................................... 4
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 3.                              History of Changes to the IRB Approved Protocol .............................. 12
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 4.                              Statistical Analysis Plan ....................................................................... 15
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 5.                              Planned Sensitivity Models .................................................................. 23
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 6.                              Post Hoc Sensitivity Analysis of the Primary Outcome Assuming
                                                       Different Imputation Strategies and Utilising Fisher’s Exact Test ....... 24
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 7.                              Post Hoc Sensitivity Analysis Utilising Exact Logistic Regression for
                                                       Outcomes with Low Event Rates in the Modified Intention-to-Treat
                                                       Cohort .................................................................................................. 25
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 8.                              Hypnotics, Analgesics, and Other Relevant Medications .................... 26
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 9.                              Participant Characteristics at Baseline in the Per-Protocol Cohort ...... 27
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 10.                             Surgical Characteristics and Study Drug Administration in the Per-
                                                       Protocol Cohort .................................................................................... 29
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 11.                             Outcomes and Clinical Characteristics of the Per-Protocol Cohort
                                                       Conditional on the Randomisation Strata ............................................. 30
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 12.                             Kaplan Meier Curve in the Modified Intention-to-Treat Cohort .......... 32

                                                                                                                                               1

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 1. MINDDS Study Investigators

Jason Z Qu MD1, Ariel Mueller MA1, Tina B McKay PhD1, M. Brandon Westover MD PhD2, Kenneth T Shelton

MD1, Shahzad Shaefi MD MPH3, David A D'Alessandro MD4, Lorenzo Berra MD1,5, Emery N Brown MD PhD1,6,

Timothy T Houle PhD      1, and Oluwaseun Akeju MD MMSc            1 on behalf of the MINDDS Study Team*

     *Members of the MINDDS Study Team Include:              Grace E Namirembe MPH1, Alan DiBiasio BS Pharm7, Chloe

     O’Connell MD1, Derek He MD1, Reine Ibala BS1, Marco L. Loggia PhD1,8, Eunice Hahm BS1, Jacob A Gitlin

     BS1,  Breanna  Ethridge  BA1,  Katia  Colon  BS1,  Isabella  Turco  BS1,    Katherine  Adelsberger  BS1,               Serguie

     Melnitchouk, MD MPH4, George Tolis MD9, Ashishana Osho MD MPH4, Hao Deng MD MPH DrPH(c)1, Ge

     Wendong PhD2, Yasmine Tameze MD1, Jamie Sparling MD1, Katarina J  Ruscic MD PhD1, Hassan S Dashti PhD

     RD1,10, Vivian Donahue RN MS11, Thoralf M Sundt MD4

     1.   Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard

          Medical School, Boston, MA

     2.   Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

     3.   Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,

          Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

     4.   Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiac Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical

          School, Boston, MA

     5.   Respiratory Care Services, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA

     6.   Institute for Medical Engineering and Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA

     7.   Department of Pharmacy, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA

     8.   Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical

          School, Charlestown, MA

     9.   Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiac Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical

          School, Boston, MA

     10.  Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA

                                                                                                                                   2

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

     11.  Blake 8 Cardiac Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA

                                                                                                                                       3

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 2. Detailed Study Protocol

  Minimizing ICU neurological dysfunction with dexmedetomidine-induced sleep (MINDDS): A randomised
                                                       placebo-controlled trial
Principal Investigator: Oluwaseun Johnson-Akeju, M.D., M.M.Sc
Version: 12/15/2020

1. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE

Delirium is an acute brain dysfunction characterised by disturbances in attention, awareness, and cognition not
explained by a pre-existing neurocognitive disorder.1 Although the increased mortality rates ascribed to delirium
remain debatable, delirium remains a leading cause of preventable morbidity in hospitalised elderly patients. It is also
associated with prolonged hospitalisation, prolonged institutionalisation, and long-term cognitive deficits.2-7 Patients
with pre-existing dementia, such as Alzheimer’s disease, are especially vulnerable to developing delirium.8 The total
healthcare cost attributable to delirium is estimated between $143 and $152 billion annually.9 In the United States,
delirium occurs in approximately 80% of critically ill patients admitted to medical/surgical intensive care units (ICU),
10 and 15% of patients admitted to cardiac surgical (CS) ICU.11 Most patients diagnosed with delirium also present
with multiple comorbidities (sepsis, multi-organ failure) that significantly confound our understanding of this disease.2
Thus, to date, no pharmacological intervention to treat delirium has been identified.2 The aging process has been
identified as a risk factor for developing delirium.
Normal aging is associated with a morphological shift of glia (microglia, astrocytes) to an activated state.                     Following
a systemic challenge such as critical illness,          these activated glia aid a neuroinflammatory state that contributes to
delirium.  The  aforementioned  neuroinflammatory  state  is  exacerbated  by  sleep  disturbances.15-17                       Thus,  sleep
deprivation may be a modifiable risk factor for the development of delirium. Presently, pharmacological treatment
with no current medication (benzodiazepines, antipsychotics) induces natural sleep or reliably reduces the incidence
of delirium. We have found that pharmacological induction of rapid eye movement sleep (REM) and non-REM
I-III sleep states using dexmedetomidine, can now be safely achieved in humans. Our overall objective is to
evaluate the efficacy of dexmedetomidine-induced sleep in preventing delirium, investigate cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying delirium, and investigate whether recently described intraoperative electroencephalogram
(EEG) signatures of the aging brain are associated with developing delirium.18 Our central hypothesis is that nightly
biomimetic sleep in elderly patients admitted to the CSICU for > 24hrs will reduce the incidence of ICU delirium.
Our intervention and control groups will be comprised of extubated CSICU patients, because their homogeneity in
terms of surgical procedures,        anaesthetic    management, and systemic inflammatory response represents a unique
opportunity to study the mechanisms underlying delirium, while limiting confounding factors that may otherwise be
encountered in heterogeneous patients found in the medical/surgical ICU. We will perform assessments of cognition
(peri-operative), obtain EEG recordings (intra-operative, ICU) and blood samples (peri-operative).
At the conclusion of these studies, we will have expanded our knowledge of the pathophysiology of delirium,
evaluated a new       pre-emptive     therapeutic strategy for delirium, suggest neurophysiologically based monitoring
strategies to reduce significantly the amount of anaesthetic administered to elderly patients – and possibly delirium –
while being certain the patient is sufficiently unconscious for surgery (individualised anesthesia care), and enable
continued investigation into the pathophysiology of this clinically important disorder.
2. SPECIFIC AIMS

We will pursue three aims. In the first aim, we will investigate the benefits of pre-emptive biomimetic sleep for
reducing the risk of developing delirium in a randomised controlled trial; in the second aim, we will investigate the
mechanisms of delirium using serum metabolic profiling; and in                   the third aim, we will investigate power spectral
analyses of intraoperative and CSICU electroencephalogram dynamics.

Table 1 shows a proposed timeline.

                                                                                                                                            4

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

   Table 1: Planned Schedule
   Hypothesis      Short Name                                                        Year 1       Year 2       Year 3       Year 4       Year 5
        1·1        Nightly pre-emptive biomimetic sleep will reduce                     ..           ..           ..
                   the incidence of delirium
        2·1        Serum metabolic profiling will be sensitive to detect                                          ..           ..
                   neurodegeneration of preclinical delirium
        3·1        Absence of anesthesia-induced frontal alpha                                                    ..           ..           ..
                   oscillations will be associated with delirium
        3·2        Burst-suppression/anesthesia overdose will be                                                  ..           ..           ..
                   associated with delirium

The specific aims of this study are:
AIM 1:      Investigate the benefits of           pre-emptive       biomimetic sleep for reducing the risk of delirium in a
Randomised Controlled Trial.
Hypothesis 1·1. Compared to standard treatments (benzodiazepines, antipsychotics), nightly pre-emptive biomimetic
sleep will reduce the incidence of ICU delirium.
AIM 2: Investigate mechanisms of delirium using serum metabolic profiling.
Hypothesis 2·1. Unbiased metabolic profiling will be sensitive to detect early signatures of neurodegeneration that
predisposes to the development of delirium.
AIM 3: Investigate power spectral analyses of intraoperative and CSICU electroencephalogram dynamics.
Hypothesis 3·1. The relative absence of anesthesia-induced frontal alpha oscillations (a putative marker of brain
vulnerability) is associated with delirium.
Hypothesis 3·2. Burst-suppression induced by the age-adjusted maintenance anaesthetic (a putative marker of
anaesthetic overdose and brain vulnerability) is associated with the severity of delirium.

3. STUDY PROCEDURES
Subject Selection: We will aim to enrol 530 patients over a period of three years into a randomised, controlled, double-
blinded, single-site, parallel-arm superiority trial. Our primary outcome is the incidence of delirium on postoperative
day 1 upon administration of the study intervention. To ensure that the study is appropriately powered for the primary
outcome measure, patients will be recruited and randomised into the study until 370 patients receive the study
intervention  on  postoperative  day  0.          Thus,  patients  will  be  censored  from  the  study  if  they  do  not  receive
dexmedetomidine or placebo on postoperative day 0. The cardiac surgical case volume at Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) will enable us to meet our recruitment goals within our projected timeline. Cardiac surgeons, cardiac
intensivists, and anaesthesiologists at MGH will identify all potential study participants. This initial care provider-
patient contact will       ensure that eligible patients are comfortable with all study procedures. Once the potential
participant confirms that he/she is comfortable with all study procedures, a copy of the consent form will be made
available. Informed consent for this protocol will follow a two part process. First, a verbal consent will be obtained at
the Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine pre-operative visit. This verbal consent is necessary
to ensure that pre-operative baseline questionnaires can be administered. During this visit, the study protocol will also
be explained to potential participants. In addition, a flyer detailing the study protocol will also be given to potential
study participants. After verbal consent is obtained, the study team will allocate a study identification number, based
on the study stratification schema, to the potential participant. Written consent will be obtained on the morning of
surgery. The research pharmacy will allocate the participant into his/her assigned intervention group according to the
randomisation key associated with each study identification number. This key will be provided to the pharmacy by
the study statisticians. All study team members, including the statisticians, and all clinical care providers will be
blinded to the treatment group assignments. All subjects who provide verbal consent and complete the baseline
assessment, but later decline participation in the study, or fail to give signed consent, will not be subject to any study-
related follow-up or intervention. However their baseline assessment, which has already been acquired, may be used
to identify factors that may predispose or bias patients toward enrolment. Patients who undergo secondary surgical
procedures after admittance to the CSICU, and/or remain intubated longer than the 12 hours stipulated below, will not
be subject to any further study procedures as they will no longer satisfy the primary inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Primary inclusion criteria for patients and controls: (1) age ≥ 60; (2) scheduled for a cardiac surgical procedure
with planned post-operative admission to the CSICU for ≥ 24 hours; (3) scheduled same day surgical admission.

                                                                                                                                                 5

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

Primary exclusion criteria for patients and controls: (1) blind, deafness or the inability to speak English; (2) greater
than 2 days of ICU admission in the month preceding the current surgical procedure; (3) renal and liver failure
requiring dialysis or Child-Pugh score > 5; (4) follow-up difficulties (i.e. active substance abuse, psychotic disorder,
homelessness); (5) previous cardiac surgery within 1 year of surgical procedure; (6) allergy to dexmedetomidine; (7)
chronic therapy with benzodiazepines and/or antipsychotics; (8) severe deficit due to structural or anoxic brain
damage; (9) surgical procedure requiring total circulatory arrest; (10) SARS-CoV-2 positive or SARS-CoV-2-like
symptoms (i.e. fever, sore throat, new cough, new nasal congestion or runny nose, muscle aches, new loss of taste or
smell, shortness of breath).
Primary objective drop criteria for patients and controls: (1) Scheduled for a second surgical procedure during
hospital stay; (2) post-operative intubation > 12 hours; (3) SARS-CoV-2 positive or SARS-CoV-2-like symptoms (i.e.
fever, sore throat, new cough, new nasal congestion or runny nose, muscle aches, new loss of taste or smell, shortness
of breath).
Intervention  (dexmedetomidine-induced  sleep  vs.  placebo).                      After  admission  to  the  CSICU,  rewarming,
discontinuation of the sedative/anaesthetic           infusion and extubation of the airway, sedative medications will be
administered as clinically indicated by the CSICU intensive care physician. Study patients admitted to the CSICU
during the afternoon and extubated by 8:30 PM, would either receive a sleep induction dose of dexmedetomidine
(1mcg/kg over 40 minutes) or placebo (normal saline or D5W over 40 minutes) every night throughout their CSICU
stay. A sustained infusion of dexmedetomidine would never be administered for study related purposes. The targeted
sleep induction time will be 9 PM. For the second start or later surgical cases, study patients admitted to the CSICU
and extubated after 8:30 PM, but before 2 AM, would either receive a sleep induction dose of dexmedetomidine
(1mcg/kg over 40 minutes) or placebo (normal saline or D5W over 40 minutes). The targeted sleep induction time
will be within 30 minutes of extubation, with the earliest administration time being 9 PM. However, throughout the
rest of the CSICU stay the sleep induction time will be targeted for 9 PM. In contrast, those patients who are admitted
to the CSICU and remain intubated past 2 AM will not begin study procedures until postoperative day 1, assuming
they are extubated within 12 hours of admission to the CSICU. The maximum dose of dexmedetomidine that will be
administered for any study participant will be 80mcg over a 40-minute period at any one instance. Nighttime EEG
may be obtained on all participants to enable sleep stage scoring in the spectral domain. The intraoperative EEG data
acquisition system (SedLine) is a four-channel EEG device approved by MGH bioengineering. This device is currently
used in all operating and procedural rooms at MGH for monitoring depth-of-anesthesia. For EEG monitoring in the
ICU we will use the Compumedics Somte Portable PSG monitoring device.
Post cardiac surgical patients that are admitted to the CSICU have implanted temporary pacemakers and are also on a
variety vasoactive medications (including but not limited to: norepinephrine, dobutamine, dopamine, and epinephrine)
to maintain hemodynamic stability. Therefore, the administration of dexmedetomidine in these patients will not unduly
compromise their cardiovascular status. However, patients with active bleeding necessitating surgical intervention
will be excluded from the study.
Outcome measures and variables of interest. The primary outcome measure for this study is the incidence delirium
in the CSICU on post-operative day 1. Secondary outcome measures include ICU- and hospital-delirium/coma-free
days, length of hospital stay, 30-day mortality, 90-day mortality, and 180-day mortality. Variables of interest will
include  age,  sex,  years  of  formal  education,  race,  ethnicity,  marital  status,  chronic  disease  burden  (Charlson
comorbidity index), cerebrovascular disease (Framingham Stroke Risk profile), physical function as assessed by NIH
Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS-29)                               questionnaires,  organ  failure
(Sequential Organ Failure Assessment), length of cardiopulmonary bypass, presence of significant cardiac dysfunction
(ejection fraction less than 35%), and sedative use in the ICU.
Cognitive testing. We will conduct delirium assessments twice daily (AM and PM with at least 6 hours between tests)
beginning on post-operative day 1 using the Long           - Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). Delirium assessments will
be conducted up to day 3 or hospital discharge,           whichever comes first. Patients who remain delirious past day 3 will
be assessed until day 5 or hospital discharge, whichever comes first.              For those patients who remain delirious past day
5, assessments will continue until day 7 or hospital discharge, whichever comes first.
Other Cognitive Testing: Cognitive decline will be estimated by taking into account the patient’s baseline cognitive

                                                                                                                                            6

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

function and sleep quality before admission to the ICU, as assessed using the PROMIS-29, abbreviated Montreal
cognitive assessment and PROMIS-4A questionnaires scored at recruitment, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months. The 3-D
CAM and TPS questionnaire will be administered at baseline. These questionnaires may be administered via email
(REDCap), regular mail, or phone call.
Blood Draws: For all patients, we will acquire peri              -operative blood samples. This will enable us relate              the serum
metabolic/inflammatory profile to primary and secondary outcomes. For all study participants, blood sampling will
be acquired as follows: (1) up to 40 ml of blood may be acquired at baseline on the day of surgery prior to the induction
of general anesthesia (5-10ml for TSPO genetic profiling);              (2) up to 20 ml of blood may be acquired at approximately
9 am of every ICU stay up to day 5.            We may apply at least three distinct LC           -MS–based methods to study distinct
plasma aliquots for each experimental sample.
Anaesthetic management and EEG data acquisition: Intraoperatively, patients will receive standard anesthesia care
in which the anaesthesiologist uses age-adjusted drug dosing information, as well as heart rate, and blood pressure to
set and titrate the anaesthetic. This portion of the study will follow a strictly observational nature. EEG will be recorded
per clinical practice in all patients using the 4-channel SedLine EEG machine that is installed in all operating rooms
at MGH. In the ICU, EEG may be acquired through the Compumedics Portable PSG monitoring device.
Other data. A member of the study team will review the patient’s bedside nursing log and clinical notes in the patient
chart. A timeline of physiological data (obtained from continuously recorded clinical data in the CSICU), sedatives,
analgesics, as well as any patient events will be recorded for later analysis in relation to outcome measures and
nighttime spectral sleep stage scoring.
4. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN
Data will be     analysed     using an intention-to-treat approach defined as all randomised patients who receive an
intervention. Continuous data will be described using median and interquartile range, and categorical data using
frequencies and proportions. The primary outcome will be evaluated using logistic regression examining the presence
or absence of delirium conditional on randomised group assignment. Any randomisation imbalances, or other potential
treatment effect modifiers will be further examined as covariates in sensitivity analyses. Secondary analyses will be
evaluated using tests that are appropriate for the             outcomes. We will use Pearson χ2 tests to compare categorical
variables between the 2 study groups and independent t-tests or Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to compare continuous
variables. Time-to-event analyses will be used to compare the effects of dexmedetomidine-induced sleep and normal
care on mortality, CSICU and hospital lengths of stay, CSICU and hospital readmission rates. Kaplan-Meier survival
curves will be used for graphical presentation of these time-to-event analyses and log-rank statistics to assess the
effects of biomimetic sleep and normal care. For mortality analyses, patients will be censored at the time of last contact
alive or days from enrolment, whichever was first. Censoring for CSICU or hospital discharge readiness analyses will
occur time of death or study withdrawal. Two-sided P values of 0·05 or less were considered to indicate statistical
significance. Because missing data rarely occur entirely at random, we will assess the associations between patient
characteristics with respect to missing data. If patients with at least one missing outcome value are different from
those with complete outcomes data, we              will use multiple imputation to assign values to missing risk factors and
outcomes in regression modelling.
Metabolite concentrations will be log transformed to reduce heteroscedasticity of case-control differences. Metabolite
levels will be compared in persons who developed delirium versus those who did not using two-tailed t tests. To screen
these associations in the context of the balance of type-I and type-II errors, we will consider both FDR adjusted and
Bonferroni-corrected P value thresholds. For metabolites meeting the less conservative FDR P value threshold, logistic
regression analyses to estimate the OR of developing cognitive deficits will be performed at different metabolite
values. Metabolites will be analysed as continuous variables (log transformed and scaled to SD of 1), and regressions
adjusted for age, sex, delirium assessment, CT-ICU length of stay, and surgical duration. To examine the unique
predictive  ability  of  these  metabolites,  we  will  conduct  an  exploratory  stepwise  logistic  model                    including  all
metabolites meeting our threshold, and conduct cross-validation procedures to examine the internal consistency of
these estimates. We will then construct a multimarker score based on the regression coefficients of the metabolites
that were significant and consistent in our multivariable model, and then assess whether a model including clinical
risk factors plus the multimarker panel improves delirium prediction compared with the model including clinical risk

                                                                                                                                              7

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

factors only.
All EEG data will be downloaded for off-line computational analysis. Data will be visualised and                            analysed using
signal processing and statistical algorithms available in MatLab, and using algorithms developed in house by the study
investigators. To address hypothesis 3·1, we will employ multitaper power spectral analysis,21 multitaper bivariate
coherence analysis.18      We will also perform phase-amplitude modulation between low and high frequency EEG
components.21 To address hypothesis 3·2, Segmentation of EEG recordings into burst and suppression periods will be
performed in a semi-automated manner using an adaptation of previously described methods.22-24 We will quantify
the depth of burst suppression using the burst suppression probability (BSP), a number between 0 and 1, which
describes the instantaneous probability of the EEG being in a state of suppression. A BSP value of 0 corresponds to a
continuously active EEG with no suppression, whereas a value of 1 corresponds to a completely isoelectric or
suppressed EEG.
5. POWER ANALYSIS
The  primary  objective  of  this  study  is  to  detect  a  difference  in  the  incidence  of  ICU  delirium  between  the
dexmedetomidine-induced sleep and normal care groups. Assuming a delirium event rate of 15%, a type I error of
0·05, and power of 0·90, an n = 185 patients per group will enable us to detect an absolute difference 10% (i.e., 15%
versus 5%). With respect to decreased morbidity and healthcare costs, this change represents a clinically meaningful
difference. Therefore, we will recruit up to 370 patients total           who receive the study intervention on postoperative day
0.
6. REMUNERATION
Patients will not be compensated for this study.

7. RISK AND DISCOMFORT
Dexmedetomidine risks: The risks involved in the administration of dexmedetomidine include nausea, xerostomia,
atrial fibrillation, and transient hypertension during drug loading. The significant risks involved are directly related to
a drug induced reduction in sympathetic activity, resulting in hypotension and bradycardia. Rare case reports of sinus
arrest in instances of rapid drug administration and in patients with a high resting vagal tone have also been described.
Drug discontinuation, dose reduction, or the use of vasoactive substances causes a return of these hemodynamic
parameters to baseline. All subject hemodynamic parameters will be continuously monitored to ensure that appropriate
medical intervention will be instituted for any clinically significant hypotensive or bradycardic episodes. In addition,
most of our study subjects will have temporary pacemakers in place for routine post-surgical heart-rate management.
Since dexmedetomidine maintains the respiratory rate and we are only administering a one-time dose (similar to our
recently completed proof of concept study in healthy volunteers; NCT01485393), there is no concern for respiratory
compromise.

EEG risks: The risks associated with EEG electrodes are redness and irritation at placement site.
Psychological risks: Psychological risks include the possibility of claustrophobia within the scanner.
Questionnaire risks: Minimal risks associated with completing questionnaires are subject fatigue and the possibility
of minor psychological distress associated with answering sensitive questions regarding psychological functioning.
Data risks:     Procedures are in place to reduce the likelihood of a breach of confidentiality including the de-
identification of data and storage of data only on partners approved devices/portals. However, there is a small risk that
people outside of this study may be exposed to information about study subjects.
8. POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Subjects will have no direct benefit from taking part in this study. Findings from these studies will help advance our
understanding of the pathophysiology of delirium. In particular, this project will assess the role of sleep induction and
neuroinflammation in the establishment and/or maintenance of delirium. As such, we envision that in the future the
information obtained from the proposed research will enhance the diagnosis and management of delirium.

                                                                                                                                             8

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

9. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
No identifiers other than study ID’s will be included in the dataset. Thus, all data will be deidentified and data will be
stored on password protected partners computers and cluster for off-line analysis.                       The proposed study will be
monitored for safety, with monthly staff meetings reviewing adverse events and treatment outcomes and directly
reporting any adverse events. The PI will also routinely monitor and assure the validity and integrity of collected data
and adherence to the IRB-approved protocol. The trained staff members who carry out the procedures will also
carefully monitor the study throughout its duration. The team will evaluate the progress of the study, verify that the
rights and wellbeing      of the subjects are protected, verify that the reported study data are accurate, complete and
verifiable from source documents, and the conduct of the study is in compliance with the approved protocol and
amendments. Outcome monitoring and adverse events will all be reported through appropriate channels of the Human
Studies Committee. A DSMB will also oversee this study.
Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others including adverse events will be reported to the PHRC
in accordance with PHRC unanticipated problems including adverse events reporting guidelines, as well as the RDRC
within 5 days.

10. SUPPLEMENTARY ANALYSIS
In a supplementary analysis data from the MINDDS study will be combined with data and specimens from the
Maximizing trEatment of Neurological Dysfunction using INtravenous Guanfacine (                       MENDING) study in an effort
to help determine future routes of study of the alpha2 agonism on delirium and              acquired-dementia/Alzheimer’s disease
and related dementias (ADRD)          . This collaboration will be established between MGH and Vanderbilt University
Medical Center in order to share data and specimens for analysis.
Briefly, the MENDING trial leverages resources              from three ongoing NIH       -funded trials. Patients in the MENDING
trial have been enrolled into one of the ongoing prospective studies through the                 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction,
and Survivorship (CIBS) Center at Vanderbilt, all of which have daily delirium monitoring and 3- and 12-month
cognitive assessments. These include the Illuminating Neuropsychological Dysfunction and Systemic Inflammatory
Mechanisms Gleaned After Hospitalisation in Trauma-ICU (INSIGHT-ICU) study (R01GM120484, PI: Patel), the
Measuring Outcomes of Activity in Intensive Care (MOSAIC) study (K76AG054864, PI: Brummel); and the Bringing
to light the Risk factors And Incidence of Neuropsychological dysfunction in ICU Survivors, 2nd (BRAIN-ICU-2)
study (R01AG058639, PI: Ely). Patients enrolled into one of these parent observational studies will subsequ                          ently
be consented for      enrolment into the MENDING clinical trial, which evaluates the role of                        the alpha-2 agonist
guanfacine. All study procedures for the MENDING trial at Vanderbilt are covered under their local IRB (Protocol
202000). Additionally, the consent for all MENDING studies includes approval to share data and specimens to
evaluate mechanisms and associations with delirium, consistent with the aims of the MINDDS study. Thus, sharing
of specimens and data will be consistent with future use described in the informed consent. Data collected from the
MENDING study will be used in conjunction with neurocognitive data from the MINDDS study in interpreting the
potential of alpha-2 agonism on delirium and ADRD.
All data shared between institutions will be           coded so that the collaborating institution cannot identify individual
participants. This limited dataset will only include dates (of neurocognitive assessments, admission/discharge) and
ages over 89. All other identifiable aspects of data will be removed. No other identifiable information will be shared.
If possible a completely deidentified data set will be shared between institutions. Data and specimen sharing will be
bi-directional in order to study of the alpha2 agonism on delirium. Appropriate data and material transfer agreements
will be obtained between sites prior to sharing of any data or specimens.

                                                                                                                                          9

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

References

1.   American Psychiatric Association., American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5 Task Force. Diagnostic and
     statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5. 5th ed. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association;
     2013.
2.   Maldonado JR. Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current etiologic theories and common pathways. The
     American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry
     2013;21:1190-222.
3.   O'Keeffe S, Lavan J. The prognostic significance of delirium in older hospital patients. Journal of the American
     Geriatrics Society 1997;45:174-8.
4.   McCusker J, Cole MG, Dendukuri N, Belzile E. Does delirium increase hospital stay? Journal of the American
     Geriatrics Society 2003;51:1539-46.
5.   Francis J, Martin D, Kapoor WN. A prospective study of delirium in hospitalized elderly. Jama 1990;263:1097-
     101.
6.   Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al. Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. The New
     England journal of medicine 2013;369:1306-16.
7.   Fong TG, Tulebaev SR, Inouye SK. Delirium in elderly adults: diagnosis, prevention                        and treatment. Nature
     reviews Neurology 2009;5:210-20.
8.   Gross AL, Jones RN, Habtemariam DA, et al. Delirium and Long-term Cognitive Trajectory Among Persons
     With Dementia. Archives of internal medicine 2012;172:1324-31.
9.   Leslie DL, Marcantonio ER, Zhang Y, Leo-Summers L, Inouye SK. One-year health care costs associated with
     delirium in the elderly population. Archives of internal medicine 2008;168:27-32.
10.  Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion
     Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Critical care medicine 2001;29:1370-9.
11.  Rudolph JL, Inouye SK, Jones RN, et al. Delirium: an independent predictor of functional decline after cardiac
     surgery. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 2010;58:643-9.
12.  Cerejeira J, Firmino H, Vaz-Serra A, Mukaetova-Ladinska EB. The neuroinflammatory hypothesis of delirium.
     Acta neuropathologica 2010;119:737-54.
13.  Norden DM, Godbout JP. Review: microglia of the aged brain: primed to be activated and resistant to regulation.
     Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 2013;39:19-34.
14.  Cunningham C. Systemic inflammation and delirium: important co-factors in the progression of dementia.
     Biochemical Society transactions 2011;39:945-53.
15.  Ingiosi AM, Opp MR, Krueger JM. Sleep and immune function: glial contributions and consequences of aging.
     Current opinion in neurobiology 2013;23:806-11.
16.  Vacas S, Degos V, Feng X, Maze M. The neuroinflammatory response of postoperative cognitive decline. British
     medical bulletin 2013;106:161-78.
17.  Zhu B, Dong Y, Xu Z, et al. Sleep disturbance induces neuroinflammation and impairment of learning and
     memory. Neurobiology of disease 2012;48:348-55.
18.  Purdon PL, Pavone KJ, Akeju O, et al. The Ageing Brain: Age-dependent changes in the electroencephalogram
     during propofol and sevoflurane general anaesthesia. British journal of anaesthesia 2015;115 Suppl 1:i46-i57.
19.  Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, Balkin S, Siegal AP, Horwitz RI. Clarifying confusion: the confusion
     assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. Annals of internal medicine 1990;113:941-8.
20.  Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, et al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of
     the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). Jama 2001;286:2703-10.
21.  Purdon  PL,  Pierce  ET,  Mukamel  EA,  et  al.  Electroencephalogram  signatures  of  loss  and  recovery  of
     consciousness from propofol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:E1142-51.
22.  Brandon Westover M, Shafi MM, Ching S, et al. Real-time segmentation of burst suppression patterns in critical
     care EEG monitoring. Journal of neuroscience methods 2013;219:131-41.
23.  Lewis LD, Ching S, Weiner VS, et al. Local cortical dynamics of burst suppression in the anaesthetized brain.
     Brain : a journal of neurology 2013;136:2727-37.
24.  Brandon Westover M, Ching S, Kumaraswamy VM, et al. The human burst suppression electroencephalogram
     of deep hypothermia. Clinical neurophysiology : official               journal of the International Federation of Clinical
     Neurophysiology 2015;126:1901-14.
25.  Chemali JJ, Wong KF, Solt K, Brown EN. A state-space model of the burst suppression ratio. Conference
     proceedings :  Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society IEEE
     Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Annual Conference 2011;2011:1431-4.

                                                                                                                                       10

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

26.  Chemali J, Ching S, Purdon PL, Solt K, Brown EN. Burst suppression probability algorithms: state-space methods
     for tracking EEG burst suppression. Journal of neural engineering 2013;10:056017.

                                                                                                                                       11

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 3. History of Changes to the IRB Approved Protocol

 Protocol Version                   Summary of Changes
 09/22/2016                         Original IRB Approved Protocol

 12/15/2016                         The use of the Mini Cog as an alternative was removed. Timing of assessments was
                                    changed from 1, 2, 3 and 12 months to only evaluate patients up to six months
                                    postoperatively. The use of a Compumedics Portable PSG monitoring device was added
                                    for exploratory data collection.

                                    Rationale: Changes to the cognitive assessment battery were removed to streamline the
                                    number of assessments performed and reduce variation in reliability across measures.

 04/12/2017                         The amount of compensation was reduced to $45 per study participant.

                                    Rationale: Given existing issues collecting in which social security number was required
                                    in order to process reimbursements, the amount of compensation as reduced so that this
                                    would no longer be required in order to process the payment.

 4/18/2017                          This amendment changes the duration of drug administration from 10 minutes to 40
                                    minutes. Sampling timepoints for blood biomarkers were changed from daily in the
                                    cardiac surgical ICU to an intraoperative sample (collected on the morning of surgery in
                                    the operating room) and a sample collected on the morning of postoperative day 1.

                                    Rationale: Changes in the drug administration duration were made in order to reduce
                                    the possibility of unblinding because of hemodynamic instability, thus ensuring the
                                    integrity of randomisation and concealment. Changes to the blood sampling timepoints
                                    were made in relation to resource considerations but it is believed these amended
                                    timepoints   represent   clinically   important   timepoints   in   which   proteomic   and
                                    inflammatory profiles of patients will be most robust.

 06/05/2017                         This  amendment  involves  the  addition  of  the  PROMIS-4A  Sleep  Disturbance
                                    questionnaire to be assessed at the same time point as the other PROMIS assessments
                                    (baseline, 30, 90,     and 180 days). The study exclusion criteria was also amended to
                                    remove the following criterion: (1) obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) requiring nighttime
                                    mechanical ventilation assistance, and (2) residence greater than 100 miles from MGH.

                                    Rationale:    Eligibility criteria was updated to be consistent with the targeted patient
                                    population for     enrolment. Exclusions for distance from the hospital were originally
                                    implemented because of restrictions to return to the hospital at follow up, however given
                                    the ability to perform telephonic assessments, this was removed. Recent literature has
                                    suggested that OSA is associated with an increased risk of delirium, so the exclusion
                                    criteria was removed to ensure patients with OSA, who are at risk of the primary
                                    outcome, were not inappropriately excluded, thus limiting the                 generalisability    of the
                                    study findings. The addition of the sleep questionnaire was implemented because of
                                    recommendations by the DSMB to capture quality of sleep at baseline.

 07/31/2017                         The following changes were included in this amendment: (1) Patients will be censored
                                    from the study if they do not receive the study intervention. (2) Only patients whose
                                    surgeries are the first case of the day, and/or commence by 12pm on the day of surgery,
                                    will be approached for written consent. (3) Patients who undergo a second surgery
                                    during their hospital stay and/or remain intubated for over 12 hours will not be subject
                                    to further study procedures. (4) Length of hospital stay will be tracked as a secondary

                                                                                                                                         12

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

                                     outcome measure rather than readiness for CSICU and hospital discharge. (5) Nighttime
                                     EEG data may be collected during the patients’ intensive care unit stay.

                                     Rationale: Censoring criteria was added to truly reflect 300 subjects who receive the
                                     intervention on study day 0, in an effort to better elucidate the true relationship between
                                     dexmedetomidine and placebo among patients who received the study drug on day 0.
                                     Limits were placed on second case surgery because of the perception that these patients
                                     would not be extubated prior to the drug administration cut-offs on postoperative day 0,
                                     thus excluding them from the possibility of receiving the study drug. Outcomes were
                                     adapted as Epic reporting of patient readiness for discharge are variable an instead
                                     dates of hospital discharge are more objective. Criteria was added to ensure protocol
                                     procedures for ancillary, exploratory outcomes were appropriately reflected in the study
                                     procedures.

 10/03/2017                          The dropout criteria added in the previous amendment has been removed. Instead all
                                     patients extubated before 2AM are now eligible for drug administration.  The duration
                                     of delirium assessments has been limited to day 3 for patients who did not experience
                                     delirium, with an option to continue to assess delirious patients until day 7 depending
                                     on their status.

                                     Rationale: The dropout criteria has been removed to ensure generalisability of our results
                                     and increase accrual rates. Reduction in the number of assessments of non-delirious
                                     patient was performed in an effort to improve retention rates for subsequent long term
                                     follow up.

 12/13/2017                          Based off a suggestion during publication of the protocol paper, the power calculation
                                     was updated to reflect a lower incidence of delirium.

                                     Rationale: At the time of peer review of the protocol paper it was suggested that the
                                     power be      re-evaluated    given the current literature that suggested an incidence of
                                     delirium was much lower that the effect estimates on which the study was based (i.e.
                                     48% vs 15%). The power was thus estimated without unblinding the data and instead
                                     the study was powered to a baseline incidence of 15% in the control group. The sample
                                     size was thus adjusted accordingly.

 01/04/2018                          The study protocol was amended to allow D5W to be supplemented in place of normal
                                     saline in the event of a saline shortage. Rationale: These changes were made as a result
                                     of a nationwide hospital shortage of saline supply.

 07/02/2018                          This amendment removed compensation for subjects and updated the study contacts.

                                     Rationale: This amendment was required because of a new institutional policy requiri                    ng
                                     social security numbers from all enrolled participants in order to receive compensation.
                                     Based off existing and previous issues obtaining this from participants, the study team
                                     decided to cease all renumerations.

 01/25/2019                          This amendment replaced the current primary care physician care satisfaction questions
                                     in the subjects' baseline assessments with the Trust in Physician Scale (TPS) survey. The
                                     study population was also be updated from 300 to 370.

                                     Rationale: The previous care satisfaction was team-generated, and was replaced in
                                     order to use a validated, reliable measure for assessment, and to allow comparison with
                                     previous literation. The study sample was updated from 300 consented to 370 consented
                                     individuals to account for potential dropout of participants who might consent at clinic
                                     verbally but would ultimately decline to participate on the day of surgery.

                                                                                                                                            13

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

 07/06/2020                         SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-CoV-2-like symptoms were added to the study protocol as both
                                    study exclusion and dropout criteria. Rationale: This amendment to the study inclusion
                                    was implemented to reduce the possibility of transmission, particularly for the safety of
                                    the study team.

 10/28/2020                         The detailed protocol was edited to clarify that we intend to enrol 370 patients in the
                                    study who receive the study intervention on postoperative day 0. Therefore, we will aim
                                    to enrol/consent 530 patients total.

                                    Rationale: Although the study still aims to only enrol 370 subjects who received the
                                    study intervention on day 0, this amendment was required in order to allow screening
                                    and consent of additional subjects who may ultimately dropout after not meeting the
                                    eligibility criteria. This amendment was required to clarify that point in the protocol.

 12/15/2020                         This study protocol was amended to include the addition of data and specimen sharing
                                    with Vanderbilt University Medical Center.

                                    Rationale:     Data  and  blood  specimens  from  the  study  Maximizing  trEatment  of
                                    Neurological Dysfunction using INtravenous Guanfacine (MENDING) may be shared
                                    with  investigators  in  order  to  evaluate  characteristics  of  delirium  between  the
                                    MENDING and MINDDS study cohorts.

                                                                                                                                          14

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 4. Statistical Analysis Plan

           Minimizing ICU neurological dysfunction with dexmedetomidine-induced sleep (MINDDS):
                                            A randomised placebo-controlled trial
                                                           NCT02856594

                                                     Statistical Analysis Plan

                               Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) Version: 1·0: August 22, 2021

Principal Investigator:                  Oluwaseun Johnson-Akeju, M.D., M.M.Sc
                                         Massachusetts General Hospital
                                         Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine

Senior Biostatistician(s):               Hao Deng, MD MPH DrPH(c); Timothy Houle, PhD
                                         Massachusetts General Hospital
                                         Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine
                                         Anesthesia Research Center (ARC)

Biostatistician:                         Jiawei Meng, MPH
                                         Massachusetts General Hospital
                                         Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine
                                         Anesthesia Research Center (ARC)

                                                                                                                                     15

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

Introduction

Background and Rationale
Delirium is an acute brain dysfunction characterised by disturbances in attention, awareness and cognition not explained
by a pre-existing neurocognitive disorder. Although the increased mortality rates ascribed to delirium remain debatable,
delirium remains a leading cause of preventable morbidity in hospitalised elderly patients. It is also associated with
prolonged hospitalisation, prolonged institutionalisation, and long-term cognitive deficits. Patients with pre-existing
dementia, such as Alzheimer’s disease, are especially vulnerable to developing delirium. The total healthcare cost
attributable to delirium is estimated between $143 and $152 billion annually. In the United States, delirium occurs in
approximately 80% of critically ill patients admitted to medical/surgical intensive care units (ICU), and 43% of patients
admitted to cardiac surgical (CS) ICU. Most patients diagnosed with delirium also present with multiple comorbidities
(sepsis,  multi-organ  failure)  that  significantly  confound  our  understanding  of  this  disease.  Thus,  to  date,  no
pharmacological intervention to treat delirium has been identified.

The aging process has previously been identified as a risk factor for developing delirium. Normal aging is associated
with a morphological shift of glia (microglia, astrocytes) to an activated state. Following a systemic challenge such as
critical illness, this activated glia aid a neuroinflammatory state that contributes to delirium. The neuroinflammatory
state is exacerbated by sleep disturbances. Thus, sleep deprivation may be a modifiable risk factor for the development
of delirium. Presently, pharmacological treatment with no current medication (benzodiazepines, antipsychotics) induces
natural sleep or reliably reduces the incidence of delirium. We have found that pharmacological induction of rapid eye
movement sleep (REM) and non-REM I-III sleep states using dexmedetomidine, can now be safely achieved in humans.
Our overall objective is to evaluate the efficacy of dexmedetomidine-induced sleep-in preventing delirium, investigate
cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying delirium, and investigate whether recently described intraoperative
electroencephalogram (EEG) signatures of the aging brain are associated with developing delirium. Our central
hypothesis is that nightly biomimetic sleep-in elderly patients admitted to the CSICU for greater than 24 hours will
reduce the incidence of ICU delirium.

Our intervention and control groups will be comprised of extubated CSICU patients, because their homogeneity in
terms of surgical procedures,          anaesthetic    management, and systemic inflammatory response represents a unique
opportunity to study the mechanisms underlying delirium, while limiting confounding factors that may otherwise be
encountered in heterogeneous patients found in the medical/surgical ICU. We will perform assessments of cognition
(perioperative), obtain EEG recordings (intraoperative, ICU) and blood samples (perioperative).

At the conclusion of these studies, we will have expanded our knowledge of the pathophysiology of delirium, evaluated
a new pre-emptive therapeutic strategy for delirium, suggest neurophysiologically based monitoring strategies to reduce
significantly the amount of anaesthetic administered to elderly patients – and possibly delirium – while being certain
the patient is sufficiently unconscious for surgery (individualised anesthesia care), and enabling continued investigation
into the pathophysiology of this clinically important disorder.

Objectives

Primary Objectives
The primary aim of the study is to investigate, via administration of dexmedetomidine or placebo postoperatively, the
benefits of pre-emptive biomimetic sleep for reducing the risk of postoperative delirium in a randomised controlled
trial.

           Hypothesis 1. Incidence of Delirium
           The null hypothesis (H0) is that the probability of delirium in the placebo group is equal to the probability of
           delirium in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative hypothesis (H1) is that the probability
           of delirium in the dexmedetomidine           -induced sleep group is less than the probability of delirium in placebo
           group. In statistical terms:
                                                              H0: Pdexmedetomidine = Pplacebo
                                                              H1: Pdexmedetomidine < Pplacebo,
           where P is the probability of delirium.

Secondary Objectives

                                                                                                                                               16

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

There are six main secondary objectives. We aimed to investigate the influence of pre-emptive biomimetic sleep on
ICU- and hospital-delirium/coma-free days, length of hospital stay, 30-day, 90-day, and 180-day mortality, cognitive
testing variables and other health related quality of life measures.

           Hypothesis 2. ICU and Hospital Delirium/Coma Free Days
           The null hypothesis is that the ICU and hospital delirium/coma free days in the placebo group is equal to the
           ICU and hospital delirium/coma free days in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative
           hypothesis is that the ICU and hospital delirium/coma free days in dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group is
           greater than the ICU and hospital delirium/coma free days in the placebo group. In statistical terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine > μplacebo,
           where μ is the ICU and Hospital delirium/coma free days.

           Hypothesis 3. Severity of Delirium
           The null hypothesis is that the severity of delirium in the placebo group is equal to the severity of delirium
           in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative hypothesis is that the severity of delirium in
           the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group is less than the severity of delirium in placebo group. In statistical
           terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine < μplacebo,
           where μ is the severity of delirium.

           Hypotheses 4a and 4b. Length of Hospital and ICU Stay
           The null hypothesis is that the length of hospital/ICU stay in the placebo group is equal to the length of
           hospital/ICU stay in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative hypothesis is that the length
           of hospital/ICU stay in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group is less than the length of hospital/ICU
           stays in placebo group. In statistical terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine < μplacebo,
           where μ is the length of hospital/ICU stay.

           Hypotheses 5a, 5b, and 5c. 30-day, 90-day, and 180-day Mortality
           The  null  hypothesis  is  that  the  mortality  in              the  placebo  group  is  equal  to  the  mortality  in  the
           dexmedetomidine-induced   sleep   group.   The   alternative   hypothesis   is   that   the   mortality   in   the
           dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group is less than the mortality in placebo group. In statistical terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine < μplacebo,
           where μ is the 30-day, 90-day, or 180-day mortality.

           Hypothesis 6. Postoperative Cognitive Status
           The null hypothesis is that for all scales related to postoperative cognitive status in the placebo group is equal
           to that in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative hypothesis is that for all scales related
           to postoperative cognitive status the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group will be superior to the placebo
           group. In statistical terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine > μplacebo,
           where μ is all scales related to postoperative cognitive status.

           Hypothesis 7. Postoperative Health Related Quality of Life
           The null hypothesis is that for all scales related to postoperative health related quality of life in the placebo
           group is equal to that in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group. The alternative hypothesis is that for all
           scales related to postoperative health related quality of life in the dexmedetomidine-induced sleep group will
           be superior to the placebo group (with direction of effect appropriate to scaling of each scale/subscale). In
           statistical terms:
                                                               H0: μdexmedetomidine = μplacebo
                                                               H1: μdexmedetomidine > μplacebo,

                                                                                                                                                 17

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

          where μ is all scales related to postoperative health related quality of life.

Trial Methods

Overall Design
In this randomised, double-blinded, controlled, single-site, parallel-arm superiority trial, eligible patients will be
randomised to receive either dexmedetomidine or placebo with a 1:1 allocation.

The primary outcome – incidence of delirium –  will be defined as the presence or absence of a positive delirium
assessment at either the morning or afternoon assessment on postoperative day one using the Confusion Assessment
Measure (CAM), as described below. Multiple sources of outcome assessment such as clinical assessment,
adjudication committee assessment and a natural language processing (NLP) method are available, therefore these
three methods will be evaluated in planned sensitivity analysis.

For secondary outcomes, ICU and hospital delirium/coma-free days assessed two times per day until postoperative
day three. Delirious patients will be assessed until postoperative day five. If delirium does not resolve by postoperative
day five, assessments will continue until postoperative day seven or hospital discharge, whichever comes first.
Severity of delirium will be assessed using the CAM delirium severity scoring long form at the time of delirium
assessments. Length of hospital stays will be measured from admission until discharge and assessed by chart review.
Mortality up to day 180 will be assessed by chart review, and/or elicited from family members during follow-up calls
at 30 days, 90 days, and 180 days postoperatively. Postoperative cognitive status and health related quality of life will
be assessed via telephone interviews and/or online questionnaires at 30 days, 90 days, and 180 days postoperatively.

Randomisation
Participants will be randomised into treatment arms in a 1:1 ratio using permuted blocks of sizes 4 to 8. Randomisation
assignments will be stratified by cardiac surgery status (i.e., cardiac vs non-cardiac surgery). The ‘blockrand’ package
in R will be used and the randomisation will be conducted by a statistician otherwise uninvolved with the study.
Allocation concealment will be maintained using a centralised pharmacy administration of study drug. Participants
will be allocated to a treatment arm by a member of the research team at confirmation that the participant meets
eligibility criteria. Both study agents are designed to look identical to each other to maintain blinding, and study staff
will remain blinded throughout the study.

Outcomes

Primary Outcomes
The primary outcome will be the presence or absence of a positive delirium assessment on postoperative day 1 using
the long-Confusion Assessment Measure (CAM). Patients will be assessed twice daily, therefore the patient will be
considered delirious on postoperative day one if delirium is present at either the morning or afternoon assessment.

Secondary Outcomes
For the secondary measures, in-hospital outcomes will be evaluated by in-person assessments during hospitalisation
and medical record review. Post-discharge measures will be assessed via the medical record or by telephone interview
at 30, 90, and 180 days post-procedure. The following variables will be measured:

          ICU and Hospital Delirium/Coma-Free Days
          ICU and hospital delirium/coma-free days will be assessed two times per day until postoperative day 3.
          Delirious patients will be assessed until postoperative day 5. If delirium does not resolve by postoperative
          day 5, assessments will continue until postoperative day 7 or hospital discharge, whichever comes first. The
          risk period for Delirium/Coma-Free Days will be calculated out of 3 days (i.e., 3                     – number of days of
          delirium). On days where delirium is not assessed due to participant discharge, ‘no delirium’ will be imputed.

          Severity of Delirium
          Severity of delirium features scored using the CAM delirium severity score long form will be assessed in all
          participants. The severity score will be calculated as the maximum score from the twice-daily assessments.
          If only one daily assessment is completed, that score will be used as the severity score.

                                                                                                                                       18

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

           Length of Hospital Stay
           Length of hospital stay (date of discharge – date of surgery).

           Inpatient Mortality and Major Inpatient Morbidity
           Inpatient   mortality and major inpatient morbidity. The following specific outcomes will be evaluated:
           readmission, surgical site infection, reoperation for bleeding, stroke, renal failure, sternal wound infection.

           Cognitive Function
           Cognitive function will be assessed using the abbreviated Montreal Cognitive Assessment total score.

           Physical Function
           Physical function will be defined using the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System®
           Short Form (PROMIS SF) V.1.2—Physical Function 8b final score. This will be assessed at baseline, at 30,
           90 and 180 days. The T-score from each standardised metric will be used in analysis.

           General Health
           The global health score will be defined from the PROMIS SF V.1.1—Global Health Short Form. From this
           assessment the overall score, the mental subscale, and the physical subscale will be                    analysed and reported.
           The T-score from each standardised metric subscales will be used in analysis.

           Pain
           Pain will be defined using the pain interference final score from the PROMIS SF V.1.0—Pain Interference
           8a instrument. The T-score from each standardised metric will be used in analysis.

           Applied Cognition
           Applied cognition abilities will be reported as the final score with the PROMIS V.1.0—Applied Cognition
           Abilities SF 8a. The T-score from each standardised metric will be used in analysis.

           Sleep Quality
           Sleep quality is defined as a raw sum score with the PROMIS V.1.0—Sleep Disturbance 4A. The T-score
           from each standardised metric will be used in analysis.

           Mortality
           Mortality will be assessed by chart review, and/or elicited from family member during follow-up calls. This
           will occur at 30, 90 and 180 days.

Patient Demographics and Ancillary Characteristics
Patient characteristics will be evaluated and described that clearly define the population being examined, including
demographic information (e.g., age, gender, race/ethnicity, and education). No information will be reported or
displayed that allow identification of the individual participants. Patient characteristics unrelated to basic demographic
information that help define the population will also be evaluated (e.g. surgical procedure).

Sample Size and Statistical Power

Sample Size
The  primary     objective  of  this  study  is  to  detect  a  difference  in  the  incidence  of  ICU  delirium  between  the
dexmedetomidine-induced sleep and placebo groups. Assuming a delirium event rate of 15%, a type I error of 0·05,
and power of 0·90, a sample size of n = 185 patients per group will enable us to detect an absolute difference of 10%
(i.e., 15% versus 5%). With respect to decreased morbidity and healthcare costs, this change represents a clinically
meaningful difference. Therefore, we will recruit up to 370 patients                    total who receive the study intervention on
postoperative day 0.

Interim and Final Analyses

Interim Analyses

                                                                                                                                            19

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

There are no planned interim analyses. Confidential review of safety events will be performed by a Data Safety
Monitoring Board (DSMB) routinely, and we will not apply stopping rules for futility or superiority.

Ending the Trial
Enrolment     will cease when the target enrolment is obtained. The final analysis will proceed when all follow-up
measurements are completed and the databased is cleaned and                 locked.

Analysis Populations

          Modified Intent-To-Treat Analysis Set
          The Modified Intent-To-Treat (mITT) set is defined to be the set of all participants who were randomised
          and were not dropped from the study before the primary outcome                      assessment (postoperative day 1). The
          mITT set will be used for the primary analysis.

          Safety analysis set
          This set consists of any randomised subjects who received any dose of the study drug or placebo at any
          timepoint. This study sample will be used for secondary analyses.

          Per-Protocol Analysis Set
          The Per-Protocol (PP) analysis set will consist of the subjects in the mITT population, who received the drug
          on study day zero.

Protocol Deviations
The numbers and proportions of participants with              protocol deviations and the numbers and proportions of days in
which there are protocol deviations will be summarised by allocated group with details of type of deviation provided.

Analyses

Primary Analyses
The primary outcome will be evaluated using logistic regression examining the presence or absence of delirium
conditional on randomised group assignment (dexmedetomidine vs placebo) and the stratification variable used in
randomisation (cardiac versus non-cardiac surgery type).

Hypothesis testing will be two-tailed with statistical significance interpreted at p < 0·05.

Secondary Analyses
The secondary outcomes involve variables with a range of measurement types and expected distributions. The
proposed methods are designed using the generalised linear model with estimation conditional on the treatment effect
(dexmedetomidine vs placebo) and the stratification variable used in randomisation (cardiac versus non-cardiac
surgery type). For binary outcomes, including the chart review definition of delirium and mortality, a binomial
distribution with a logit link will be used. For continuously scaled outcomes with at least ordinal measurement
properties, including severity of delirium, PROMIS function outcomes, pain, and sleep, a gaussian distribution with
either an identity or log link will be used to accommodate deviations from normality. Secondary outcomes will be
evaluated at each measurement occasion.

Using the same formulation as above, time-to-event analyses will be used to compare the effects                      of dexmedetomidine
and placebo on mortality, and CSICU and hospital lengths of stay. Cox proportional hazard models will be used for
estimation and Kaplan-Meier survival curves will be used for graphical presentation of these time                     -to-event outcomes,
with adjusted hazard ratios will be used to assess these effects. Censoring for CSICU or hospital discharge readiness
analyses will occur at time of death or trial withdrawal.

Missing Data
Long-CAM assessments for patients who are reintubated for clinical care or for further surgical management will be
considered as missing data for the primary analysis.

                                                                                                                                           20

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

Due to the nature of the study methods and in-hospital timing of data collection, only small amounts of missing data
are expected in the mITT set. If there are greater than 5% missing primary outcome assessments, a sensitivity model
will be conducted to examine the impact of missing data on the treatment effect estimate for the primary outcome. A
multiple imputation model will be conducted using all prognostic variables as outlined above. Additionally, the
secondary outcome of chart review/NLP derived delirium will be used as a predictor in the multiple imputation model.
The models will be conducted using multiple imputations by chained equations (MICE), with m = 20 iterations, using
predictive mean matching algorithm (PMM). The pooled estimates will be combined using Rubin’s rules.

Sensitivity Considerations
Several sensitivity models are planned to evaluate the treatment effect estimates under the context of differing
assumptions.

The primary models will be re-specified adding a set of prognostic variables that might impact treatment effect. Age,
preoperative cognitive function, cardiac condition, surgery duration, and sex will be specified as fixed covariate
predictors, as these variables are known to be associated with presence of delirium. The conditional estimates based
on this model will be informally compared to that from the primary model with predictions from this model used to
estimate treatment effects.

As above, treatment heterogeneity will be examined using interaction terms between cardiac condition, age, sex,
preoperative cognitive function, surgery time (morning vs afternoon) and treatment assignment (e.g., age x treatment).
Because such interaction terms are difficult to power, and subject to spurious associations, they will be treated as
exploratory and used in a hypothesis-generating context.

As above, in order to ensure treatment effects are sufficiently robust, baseline variables that are unexpectedly
imbalanced (i.e., ASD > 0·10) will be entered into the models as covariates for the primary outcome model.

As described in the missing data approach, a sensitivity analysis will be triggered if missing data is greater than 5%
for the mITT sample.

Although the number of individuals who are randomised but do not receive a study medication is expected to be small,
an additional sensitivity analysis will be conducted by including these individuals in the analysis according to their
randomisation assignment and imputing missing outcome assessments as described in the multiple imputation models.

Safety
The numbers and proportions of participants with death events and date of death, cause of death will be summar                            ised
by allocated group with details.

Statistical Software
The latest versions of R (R core Team, Vienna, Austria) and RStudio (Boston, MA) will be used to examine all
hypotheses and analyse all data.

Consort (2010)
A CONSORT Flow Diagram (2010) will be presented illustrating the number of individuals who were screened, were
eligible for the trial, who withdrew from the study, and any other information that defines how the total number of
participants in the intent to treat and per protocol analyses was generated. Included in this will be those who withdrew,
why they withdrew, and at what point in the trial they withdrew. Any publications stemming from the analyses will
conform to the CONSORT 2010 reporting guidelines.

                                                                                                                                           21

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

Addendum 1
12/8/2017 Clinical Trials Registration
The clinical trial registration was updated to reflect a corrected target sample size of 370 patients for the per-protocol
sensitivity analysis (it was erroneously listed as N = 300 on clinicaltrials.gov).

Addendum 2
On July 15, 2021, an unplanned, blinded interim analysis was conducted due to slow recruitment caused by COVID-
19. Several simulation studies were conducted using the currently enrolled sample and the overall (i.e., pooled)
primary outcome event rate.

Below are summary data for context:

     •     Total Randomised Cohort = 465 patients

     •     Intention to Treat Cohort = 391 patients
                o     Day 1 Delirium = 5·6% (primary outcome; lower than the 10% expected)

Simulation results for ITT analysis based on the observed event rate: Using the ITT cohort to date, and assuming a
two-tailed alpha = 0·05, and a 1:1 randomisation ratio, the study is powered to detect a difference of ± 3·2% from the
marginal event rate of 5·6% for the two groups. This would suggest adequate power to detect a difference in
proportions  if  the  group  delirium  rates  were  8·8%  and  2·4%  (or  more  extreme).  Enrolling  and  randomising
approximately 100 additional patients would provide power to detect a ± 2·9% difference from the pooled rate (e.g.,
8·5% vs 2·7%).

Based on the results of simulations, it was concluded by the PI and study team that continuing to recruit patients into
the MINDDS study posed diminishing returns in relation to the value of the added statistical power when compared
to additional recruitment time and costs. Given that the observed event rate is lower than anticipated and that enrolling
additional patients is unlikely to remediate the statistical power in relation to the original effect size assumptions, the
study PI asked the statistical team to engage with the DSMB to ensure that there are no fundamental concerns to
closing the study. Following approval from the DSMB, the study was closed to enrolment on July 29, 2021.

                                                                                                                                            22

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 5. Planned Sensitivity Models

 Prespecified Sensitivity Analyses for Primary Outcome
                                                                                                        N            Odds Ratioa
                                                                                                                        (95% CI)

 Modified Intention to Treat Cohort

 Model 1 (Primary): Adjusted for Cardiac Randomisation Strata Only                                     364         0·32 (0·10, 0·83)

 Model 2 (Prognostic): Adjusted for Age, Preoperative Cognitive Function,                              364         0·31 (0·09, 0·88)
   Cardiac Strata, Surgery Duration, and Sex
 Model 3 (Multiple Imputation): Multiple Imputation Based on Delirium                                  394         0·33 (0·12, 0·91)
   Keywords Chart Review and Prognostic Variables
 Per Protocol Cohort

 Model 1 (Primary):  Adjusted for Cardiac Randomisation Strata Only                                    312         0·23 (0·03, 0·91)

 Model 2 (Prognostic): Adjusted for Age, Preoperative Cognitive Function,                              312         0·25 (0·04, 1·05)
   Cardiac Strata, Surgery Duration, and Sex
 Model 3 (Multiple Imputation): Multiple Imputation Based on Delirium                                  334         0·23 (0·05, 1·08)
   Keywords Chart Review and Prognostic Variables

 aEffect estimates are reported comparing the dexmedetomidine group to the placebo group (reference).
 Abbreviations: CI (confidence interval), N (Number of Observations)

                                                                                                                                      23

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 6. Post Hoc Sensitivity Analysis of the Primary Outcome Assuming
Different Imputation Strategies and Utilising Fisher’s Exact Test

                                                                             Placebo              Dexmedetomidine               P-Value
                                                                             N = 206                    N = 188

 Delirium on postoperative day one (as assessed)                           16/189 (8·5)               5/175 (2·9)                 0·035

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as                            16/206 (7·8)               5/188 (2·7)                 0·039
 negative for delirium

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as                           33/206 (16·0)               18/188 (9·6)                0·078
 negative for delirium

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as positive
 for delirium if delirium was present on postoperative                     17/190 (9·0)               6/176 (3·4)                 0·046
 day two

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as positive
 for delirium if delirium was present on postoperative                     17/196 (8·7)               6/184 (3·3)                 0·043
 day two, and negative for delirium if delirium was
 absent on day two

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as positive
 for delirium if delirium was present on postoperative                    27/200 (13·5)               10/180 (5·6)                0·013
 day two or if data were missing on day two

 Coded missing data on postoperative day one as positive
 for delirium if delirium was present on postoperative                    27/206 (13·1)               10/188 (5·3)                0·012
 day two or if data were missing on day two, and
 negative for delirium if delirium was absent on day two.

 The resulting p-values for Fishers Exact Test p-values were calculated by doubling the exact one-tailed probability.

                                                                                                                                          24

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 7. Post Hoc Sensitivity Analysis Utilising Exact Logistic Regression for
Outcomes with Low Event Rates in the Modified Intention-to-Treat Cohort

                                                                                Effect Estimate c                 P Value
                                                                                     (95% CI)

        Univariate Models
        Postoperative Day 1 Delirium (Primary Outcome)a                         0·32 (0·09, 0·94)                   0·036
        Postoperative Delirium Days 1 to 3b                                     0·58 (0·27, 1·22)                    0·17
        Surgical Site Infection                                                 0·73 (0·06, 6·43)                    1·00
        Reoperation for Bleeding                                                0·55 (0·01, 10·57)                   1·00
        Renal Failure                                                          3·32 (0·26, 175·35)                   0·56
        In Hospital Mortality                                                  3·32 (0·26, 175·35)                   0·56
        30 Day Mortality                                                       3·32 (0·26, 175·35)                   0·56
        90 Day Mortality                                                       4·44 (0·43, 220·52)                   0·32
        180 Day Mortality                                                       1·10 (0·20, 5·98)                    1·00
        Models Conditional on Randomization Strata
        Postoperative Day 1 Delirium (Primary Outcome)a                         0·32 (0·09, 0·94)                   0·036
        Postoperative Delirium Days 1 to 3b                                     0·58 (0·27, 1·22)                    0·17
        Surgical Site Infection                                                 0·69 (0·06, 6·17)                    1·00
        Reoperation for Bleeding                                                0·54 (0·01, 10·39)                   1·00
        Renal Failure                                                          3·29 (0·26, 173·55)                   0·56
        In Hospital Mortality                                                  3·29 (0·26, 173·55)                   0·56
        30 Day Mortality                                                       3·29 (0·26, 173·55)                   0·56
        90 Day Mortality                                                       4·43 (0·43, 219·64)                   0·32
        180 Day Mortality                                                       1·11 (0·20, 6·03)                    1·00
        aA total of 30 participants (13 in dexmedetomidine group and 17 in the placebo group) were missing
        the primary outcome, incidence of delirium on postoperative day 1.  bA total of 57 participants (28 in
        dexmedetomidine group and 29 in the placebo group) had missing delirium assessments through
        postoperative day three. No other data was missing unless specified. cEffect estimates are reported as
        odds ratios comparing the dexmedetomidine group to the placebo group (reference).

                                                                                                                                       25

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 8. Hypnotics, Analgesics, and Other Relevant Medications

                                              Placebo                                     Dexmedetomidine
                                              N = 206                                            N = 188                       P Value
                                N Received                 Dose                    N Received                 Dose

 Intraoperative Medications
   Midazolam, mg                     145                  2 [2, 4]                     127                  2 [2, 4]             0·64
   Propofol, mg                      174             687 [345, 1226]                   157             704 [332, 1222]           0·83
   Fentanyl, mcg                     175              500 [500, 750]                   158              500 [500, 750]           0·38
   Hydromorphone                     134              1·0 [0·5, 1·5]                   124               1·0 [0·5, 1·5]          0·78
   Etomidate                          5                 16 [15, 18]                     6                 20 [20, 20]            0·16
   Morphine, mg                      23                 10 [10, 20]                     10                10 [10, 20]            0·31
 Administered After Extubation Until 6PM on Postoperative Day 1
   Fentanyl, mcg                     11                50 [25, 150]                     11               100 [50, 200]           0·39
   Haloperidol                       11             1·00 [0·50, 1·50]                   8              1·00 [0·75, 1·75]         0·93
   Oxycodone                         118            30·0 [20·0, 45·0]                  120             37·0 [25·0, 47·5]         0·44
   Ketorolac                         12                 30 [30, 60]                     14                30 [30, 60]            0·89
   Lorazepam                          3             0·50 [0·25, 1·00]                   2              0·50 [0·50, 0·50]         1·00
   Tylenol                           155            1950 (1300, 2275)                  135            1950 (1300, 2600)          0·19
 Data is presented as median [quartile 1, quartile 3. The p-values compares the dose of each medication among
 those who received it in each group.

                                                                                                                                     26

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 9. Participant Characteristics at Baseline in the Per-Protocol Cohort

                                                                             Placebo                         Dexmedetomidine
                                                                             N = 175                                N = 159
 Demographics
 Age, years                                                             69·0 [65·0, 74·0]                     67·0 [63·0, 73·0]
 Male Sex                                                                   128 (73·1)                            122 (76·7)
 Height, centimetres                                                  175·3 [167·6, 180·3]                  175·3 [167·6, 180·3]
 Weight, kilograms                                                      86·0 [72·6, 95·5]                     85·3 [77·1, 97·5]
 Body Mass Index, kg/m²                                               27·62 [25·13, 30·96]                  28·19 [25·13, 31·99]
 Self-Reported Race
  White                                                                     171 (97·7)                            153 (96·2)
  Asian                                                                       2 (1·1)                                5 (3·1)
  American Indian or Alaskan Native                                           0 (0·0)                                1 (0·6)
  Other                                                                       1 (0·6)                                0 (0·0)
  Unknown                                                                     1 (0·6)                                0 (0·0)
 Ethnicity
  Hispanic or Latino                                                          1 (0·6)                                1 (0·6)
  Not Hispanic of Latino                                                    166 (94·9)                            152 (95·6)
  Not Documented                                                              8 (4·6)                                6 (3·8)
 Marital Status at Enrolment
   Married                                                                  134 (76·6)                            116 (73·0)
   Divorced                                                                  14 (8·0)                              18 (11·3)
   Single                                                                    12 (6·9)                               10 (6·3)
   Widowed                                                                   14 (8·0)                               13 (8·2)
   Other                                                                      0 (0·0)                                2 (1·3)
   Unknown                                                                    1 (0·6)                                0 (0·0)
 Highest Level of Education
   8th Grade but Less than High School Graduate                               0 (0·0)                                3 (1·9)
   High School Graduate, GED                                                 26 (14·9)                             27 (17·0)
   Some College, Associate's Degree                                          36 (20·6)                             32 (20·1)
   Bachelor's Degree                                                         52 (29·7)                             46 (28·9)
   Master’s Degree                                                           35 (20·0)                             24 (15·1)
   Doctoral Degree                                                           26 (14·9)                             26 (16·4)
   Unknown                                                                    0 (0·0)                                1 (0·6)
 Comorbidities and Past Medical History
 Diabetes                                                                    33 (18·9)                             36 (22·6)
 Hypertension                                                               134 (76·6)                            123 (77·4)
 Heart Failurea                                                           46/170 (27·1)                          50/157 (31·8)
 Prior Myocardial Infarction                                                 15 (8·6)                              17 (10·7)
 Previous Cardiac Intervention                                               48 (27·4)                             49 (30·8)
 Peripheral Arterial Disease                                                 11 (6·3)                               14 (8·8)
 Cerebrovascular Disease                                                     21 (12·0)                             16 (10·1)
 Liver Disease                                                                7 (4·0)                                7 (4·4)

                                                                                                                                         27

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

                                                                             Placebo                         Dexmedetomidine
                                                                             N = 175                                N = 159
 Syncope                                                                      7 (4·0)                                3 (1·9)
 Sleep Apnoea                                                                44 (25·1)                             32 (20·1)
 Chronic Lung Disease                                                        29 (16·6)                             22 (13·8)
 Baseline Neurocognitive and PROMIS Scores
 Delirium at Baseline                                                         0 (0·0)                                0 (0·0)
 Abbreviated MoCA                                                       19·0 [18·0, 20·0]                      19·0 [17·0, 20·0]
 PROMIS Scoresb
    Global Health – Physical                                            50·8 [44·9, 57·7]                      50·8 [44·9, 57·7]
    Global Health – Mental                                              56·0 [48·3, 62·5]                      56·0 [50·8, 62·5]
   Physical Function                                                    46·4 [40·1, 59·7]                      45·5 [39·4, 52·5]
   Pain Interference                                                    40·7 [40·7, 51·2]                      40·7 [40·7, 55·0]
   Applied Cognition                                                    51·7 [45·9, 62·7]                      53·0 [45·9, 62·7]
   Sleep Disturbancec                                                   50·5 [43·8, 54·3]                      50·5 [43·8, 56·1]
 2Data is presented as mean (standard deviation), median [quartile 1, quartile 3], or n (%) depending on variable
 type  and  distribution.      aHistory  of  heart  failure  was  missing  for  seven  participants,  including  two  in  the
 dexmedetomidine group and five participants in the placebo group. bAll PROMIS scores are translated to T-scores
 for reporting. cBaseline PROMIS sleep disturbance scores were introduced after enrolment began, therefore sleep
 disturbance  scores  are  missing  in  the  first  ten  enrolled  participants          (six  in  the  placebo  group  and  four  in
 dexmedetomidine group). No other data was missing unless specified. Abbreviations: GED (General Educational
 Development), MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment), PROMIS (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
 Information System)

                                                                                                                                         28

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 10. Surgical Characteristics and Study Drug Administration in the Per-
Protocol Cohort

                                                                            Placebo                        Dexmedetomidine
                                                                             N = 175                              N = 159

 Surgical Characteristics
 Cardiopulmonary Bypass Time, minutes                                 128·0 [95·0, 162·0]                  125·0 [93·0, 162·0]
 Cross Clamp Timea, minutes                                           88·0 [70·0, 115·0]                    90·0 [73·0, 116·0]
 Strata at Randomisation: Isolated CABG Surgery                             35 (20·0)                            35 (22·0)
 Procedure Type Performed
   Isolated CABG                                                            34 (19·4)                            33 (20·8)
   AV Replacement + CABG                                                    23 (13·1)                             13 (8·2)
   AV Replacement + MV Replacement                                           3 (1·7)                              1 (0·6)
   AV Replacement                                                           40 (22·9)                            35 22·0)
   MV Repair                                                                29 (16·6)                            37 (23·3)
   MV Repair + CABG                                                          4 (2·3)                              3 (1·9)
   MV Replacement + CABG                                                     1 (0·6)                              2 (1·3)
   MV Replacement                                                            4 (2·3)                              2 (1·3)
   Other                                                                    37 (21·1)                            33 (20·8)
 Afternoon Surgery                                                          28 (16·0)                            18 (11·3)
 Study Drug Administration
 Received the Study Drug (Ever)                                           175 (100·0)                          159 (100·0)
 Received the Study Drug on POD 0                                         175 (100·0)                          159 (100·0)
 Number of Days Receiving the Study Drug
   0                                                                         0 (0·0)                              0 (0·0)
   1                                                                       147 (84·0)                           131 (82·4)
   2                                                                         17 (9·7)                            18 (11·3)
   3                                                                         10 (5·7)                             10 (6·3)
   4                                                                         1 (0·6)                              0 (0·0)
 Data is presented as mean (standard deviation), median [quartile 1, quartile 3], or n (%) depending on variable
 type and distribution. aCross clamp time was missing for one  participant in the dexmedetomidine group who did
 not have their aorta clamped. Abbreviations: AV (aortic valve), MV (mitral valve), CABG (coronary artery bypass
 graft), POD (postoperative day)

                                                                                                                                      29

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 11. Outcomes and Clinical Characteristics of the Per-Protocol Cohort
Conditional on the Randomisation Strata

                                                        Placebo             Dexmedetomidine             Effect Estimate g
                                                        N = 175                    N = 159                   (95% CI)             P Value

Delirium Outcomes
Postoperative Day 1
  Delirium (Primary Outcome)a                         9/162 (5·6)                2/150 (1·3)            0·23 (0·03, 0·91)          0·036
  Delirium Severity b                                3·0 [2·0, 4·0]             3·0 [2·0, 4·0]          0·97 (0·89, 1·06)           0·50
Postoperative Days 1 to 3c
  Delirium                                          16/152 (10·5)                9/135 (6·7)            0·60 (0·25, 1·39)           0·25
  Delirium Severity b                                3·0 [2·0, 4·5]             3·0 [2·0, 4·0]          0·97 (0·90, 1·05)           0·52
Delirium Free Days to Day 3c                                                                            1·73 (0·76, 4·21)           0·20
  0                                                   0/158 (0·0)                0/157 (0·0)
  1                                                   5/168 (3·0)                3/157 (1·9)
  2                                                  11/168 (6·5)                6/157 (3·8)
  3                                                 152/168 (90·5)             148/157 (94·3)
Hospital Clinical Characteristics
Length of Hospital Stay, days b                      6·0 [5·0, 7·0]             6·0 [5·0, 8·0]          1·02 (0·94, 1·10)           0·63
Length of ICU Stay, hours b                       25·2 [23·0, 32·6]          26·0 [23·0, 45·0]          1·07 (0·95, 1·21)           0·24

Readmitted to the ICU                                    4 (2·3)                    6 (3·8)             1·68 (0·47, 6·67)           0·43
Total Postoperative Ventilation                   4·80 [3·90, 6·50]          4·70 [3·80, 6·20]          0·96 (0·85, 1·08)           0·46
Time, hours b
Discharged to Homed                                 141/174 (81·0)             139/157 (88·5)           1·80 (0·98, 3·40)           0·06

Clinical Characteristics Within 30 Days Postoperatively
Readmitted e                                         14/174 (8·0)               13/155 (8·4)            1·04 (0·47, 2·29)           0·93

Surgical Site Infection                                  3 (1·7)                    2 (1·3)             0·69 (0·09, 4·28)           0·69
Reoperation for Bleeding                                 2 (1·1)                    0 (0·0)                     NA                  1·00
Stroke                                                   1 (0·6)                    0 (0·0)                     NA                  1·00
Renal Failure                                            1 (0·6)                    1 (0·6)            1·13 (0·04, 28·78)           0·93
Atrial Fibrillation                                    74 (42·3)                  57 (35·8)             0·77 (0·49, 1·19)           0·24
Mortality
In Hospital Mortality                                    1 (0·6)                    2 (1·3)            2·19 (0·21, 47·34)           0·53
30 Day                                                   1 (0·6)                    2 (1·3)            2·19 (0·21, 47·34)           0·53
90 Day                                                   1 (0·6)                    3 (1·9)            3·33 (0·42, 67·77)           0·30
180 Day                                                  3 (1·7)                    3 (1·9)             1·11 (0·20, 6·07)           0·90
Neurocognitive and PROMIS Scores at Follow Up
Number Assessed at Follow Up
  30 Days                                                 118                         116                        ---                 ---
  90 Days                                                 108                         98                         ---                 ---
  180 Days                                                105                         106                        ---                 ---

                                                                                                                                          30

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

Abbreviated MoCA b
  30 Days                                          20·0 [19·0, 21·0]          20·0 [18·0, 21·0]          0·98 (0·95, 1·01)           0·22
  90 Days                                          20·0 [19·0, 21·0]          20·0 [19·0, 21·0]          1·01 (0·98, 1·03)           0·73
  180 Days                                         21·0 [19·0, 22·0]          20·5 [19·0, 21·0]          0·98 (0·94, 1·02)           0·25
PROMIS Global Health – Physical f
  30 Days                                          47·7 [42·3, 54·1]          50·8 [44·9, 54·1]            0·5 (-1·7, 2·7)           0·66
  90 Days                                          54·1 [47·7, 57·7]          54·1 [47·7, 61·9]            0·4 (-2·1, 2·9)           0·75
  180 Days                                         54·1 [50·8, 61·9]          57·7 [50·8, 61·9]           -0·4 (-2·8, 2·0)           0·76
PROMIS Global Health – Mental f
  30 Days                                          56·0 [50·8, 67·6]          59·0 [50·8, 67·6]            0·8 (-1·5, 3·2)           0·48
  90 Days                                          62·5 [56·0, 67·6]          59·0 [53·3, 67·6]           -0·4 (-2·8, 2·0)           0·75
  180 Days                                         62·5 [53·3, 67·6]          62·5 [53·3, 67·6]           -0·4 (-2·7, 1·9)           0·75
PROMIS Physical Function f
  30 Days                                          39·1 [35·5, 44·6]          40·8 [36·8, 46·4]            1·1 (-0·9, 3·0)           0·28
  90 Days                                          47·5 [43·7, 52·5]          48·8 [44·6, 59·7]            0·7 (-1·6, 3·0)           0·54
  180 Days                                         50·4 [46·4, 59·7]          50·4 [45·5, 59·7]           -0·5 (-2·8, 1·7)           0·63
PROMIS Pain Interference f
  30 Days                                          51·2 [40·7, 56·6]          49·9 [40·7, 55·8]           -0·5 (-2·8, 1·7)           0·65
  90 Days                                          40·7 [40·7, 49·9]          40·7 [40·7, 51·2]            0·7 (-1·4, 2·8)           0·53
  180 Days                                         40·7 [40·7, 40·7]          40·7 [40·7, 47·9]           -0·3 (-2·0, 1·4)           0·76
PROMIS Applied Cognition f
  30 Days                                          53·0 [47·7, 62·7]          54·6 [48·2, 62·7]            1·0 (-1·1, 3·1)           0·34
  90 Days                                          54·6 [47·7, 62·7]          53·0 [49·5, 62·7]            0·3 (-2·1, 2·8)           0·80
  180 Days                                         53·0 [48·6, 62·7]          53·8 [47·7, 62·7]           -0·5 (-2·7, 1·7)           0·64
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance f
  30 Days                                          50·5 [43·8, 56·1]          50·5 [43·8, 56·1]           -1·2 (-3·7, 1·3)           0·35
  90 Days                                          48·4 [41·1, 54·3]          48·4 [43·8, 52·4]            0·2 (-2·1, 2·5)           0·87
  180 Days                                         46·2 [41·1, 50·5]          46·2 [41·1, 50·5]           -0·5 (-2·9, 1·9)           0·70
Data is presented as mean (standard deviation), median [quartile 1, quartile 3], or n (%) depending on variable type
and distribution. aA total of 22 participants (9 in dexmedetomidine group and 13 in the placebo group) were missing
the primary outcome, incidence of delirium on postoperative day one. bValues were log transformed for analysis, with
resulting effect estimates presented as a ratio of geometric means. Effect estimates can be interpreted as the percent
increase (or decrease) in for every one-unit increase (e.g. 1.02 corresponds to a 2% increase in the dexmedetomidine
group).  cA total of 47 participants (24 in dexmedetomidine group and 23 in the placebo group) had missing delirium
assessments through postoperative day three. One additional  participant was assessed as delirious but the delirium
severity score was missing. dDischarge status was missing for 3 participants (2 in dexmedetomidine group and 1 in
the placebo group). eReadmission status was missing for 5 participants (4 in dexmedetomidine group and 1 in the
placebo group). No other data was missing unless specified. fAll PROMIS scores are translated to T-scores for
reporting. gEffect estimates are reported as odds ratios (binary outcomes) or mean difference (continuous outcomes)
comparing the dexmedetomidine group to the placebo group (reference). Abbreviations: ICU (intensive care unit),
MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment), PROMIS (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System)

                                                                                                                                           31

Nighttime dexmedetomidine for delirium prevention in non-mechanically ventilated patients after cardiac
surgery (MINDDS): a single-centre, parallel-arm, randomised, placebo-controlled superiority trial (Qu et al.)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX 12. Kaplan Meier Curve in the Modified Intention-to-Treat Cohort

                                                                                                                               32
