[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

News&Analysis

204

Medical News & Perspectives

RSVVaccines, Finally Within Reach, Could Prevent Tens of Thousands of Yearly Deaths

Jennifer Abbasi

S tarting in December of 1965, thirtyone infants, most of them African American, from Washington, DC, received an investigational respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccine as part of a series of clinical trials. Not only did the vaccine not protect the children, who were aged 2 to 7 months when the study began, but it made them more vulnerable to serious illness when they were naturally exposed to the virus. Eighteen of the 23 vaccinated children who became infected, but only 1 of 21 infected children in a control group, subsequently were hospitalized with RSV infection and 2 toddlers in the RSV vaccine group-a 14-month-old and a 16-month-old-died.

The trial investigators, who had obtained parental consent for the National Institutes of Health-funded study, reported that the experimental heat- and formalininactivated whole-virus vaccine had caused an 'altered, exaggerated' response to natural RSV infection. Today, the phenomenon is known as vaccine-associated enhanced respiratory disease, or ERD, but exactly how it transpired in the trial still isn't completely understood.

After the tragic outcome, RSV vaccines for children largely were abandoned for half acentury,accordingtoAsuncionMejias,MD, PhD, a pediatric infectious disease specialist and associate professor at Nationwide Children's Hospital and The Ohio State University College of Medicine. Scientists switched gears and in the 1990s discovered 2 therapies to prevent severe RSV infection in highrisk infants: now-discontinued RSV immune globulin intravenous (RSV-IGIV), marketed as RespiGam, and palivizumab, marketed as Synagis, the first monoclonal antibody approved for an infectious disease.

Vaccine developers focused on older adults, in whom the infection also can be associated with severe disease and death, and pregnant individuals, who can transfer antibodies across the placenta to the unborn child. But still, no RSV vaccine has come to market.

JAMA January 18, 2022 Volume 327, Number 3

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection

RSV spreads easily by contact with infected droplets of saliva or mucus

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for RSV infections Symptoms usually improve within 1 to 2 weeks Antibiotics are not helpful for RSV infections

The field has proceeded slowly, as scientists have worked not only to understand the trial participants' abnormal immune responses but also to improve vaccine-induced protection against the virus. Over the past decade, important advancements in structural biology and vaccine antigen design have accelerated discovery. 'With the newer technologies, there has been a real renaissance in the development of preventive strategies against RSV,' Mejias said in an interview.

Thanks in large part to innovations in structure-based vaccinology, the first RSV vaccine-likelyforolderadults-isnowwithin reach. A version for maternal vaccination couldfollow.Aprophylacticmonoclonalantibodytoprotectallinfantscouldcomeeven sooner. And for the first time since the infamous 1960s trial, a childhood vaccine for RSV isn't out of the question.

AStubborn Scourge

Although scientists discovered RSV in 1955 and quickly linked it to severe lower respiratory tract infections in infants, Mejias said thevirus's substantial contribution to childhoodillnesswasn'tappreciateduntilthefirst global RSVdatawerepublishedin2010and

(Reprinted)

Highest-risk populations

Young children, especially infants younger than 1 year

People with weakened immune systems

Symptoms

Begin 3 to 7 days after exposure

Fever

Wheezing

Runny nose or nasal congestion

Chest congestion

Difficulty breathing

Cough

Fluids

Medications to relieve fever or treat other symptoms, such as wheezing

2012. The analyses implicated the virus as the most common cause of pneumonia, bronchiolitis, and other acute lower respiratorytractinfectionsamongchildrenyounger than5years;aleadingdriverofpediatrichospitalizations; and the second-leading cause of death in the first year of life in resourcelimited countries.

The epidemiological findings renewed interest in developing RSV vaccines and therapeutics and fueled a major effort to shoreupinternationalsurveillance.Aglobal follow-up analysis that included data from nearly 300 new studies estimated that about60000hospitalizedchildrenyounger than 5 years died from RSV infections in 2015,withinfantsinthefirst6monthsoflife representing almost half of these deaths.

Overall,includingbothinandoutofhospitals, RSV accounted for an estimated 118 200 deaths among young children that year,mostoftheminresource-limitedcountries. A huge burden of disease also exists in well-resourced nations. In the US, the virus is responsible for millions of pediatric outpatient visits and tens of thousands of hospitalizations every year. 'We have a pandemic every single winter, but we just deal with it,' Mejias said.

© 2021 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by Cancer Inst and Hospital - CAMS, li bai on 09/06/2026

jama.com

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

News&Analysis

RSVessentially infects everyone by age 2 and then reinfects over the lifespan. After the first bout, the virus typically causes common cold symptoms. But older adults, especially those who are frail and have health problems, as well as people of all ages with compromised immune systems, can experience severe illness. An average of 177 000 adults aged 65 years or older are hospitalized with RSV annually in the US and 14 000 die.

Most of the world's common infectious diseases have been susceptible to traditional vaccine design but certain pathogens-HIV,cytomegalovirus,andRSV, to namejustafew-haveprovenmorechallenging. Experts say the burgeoning field of structure-basedvaccinologycouldsubstantially improve the outlook for these stubborn scourges, starting with RSV.

Inthisapproach,scientistsstudythetargetpathogen'sphysicalformtoidentifyideal vaccine components, which they then synthesize with custom alterations. To do so, they may work backward, first isolating antibodies that potently neutralize the virus andthenrenderingdetailedimagesoftheviral structures where those antibodies bind. Theythensyntheticallyengineerthosestructures with modifications to improve immunogenicity, breadth, safety, or other characteristics. If successful, their designerantigens will safely induce the desired antibodies and train the immune systemtochurnthemout the next time it encounters the virus.

For current SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, the key structure is the spike protein. For many influenza vaccine candidates, the structure ofinterestisthehemagglutininprotein.And for RSV, vaccine developers have typically focused on the fusion (F) protein.

In 2000, using electron microscopy, researchers observed 2 different forms of RSVF, which later were confirmed to be the protein's prefusion (pre-F) and postfusion (post-F) states. Jason McLellan, PhD, a structural biologist at the University of Texas (UT) at Austin, explained in an interview: 'The protein itself changes and refolds, kind of like a Transformer going from a robot to a car. While doing this, it ends up fusing the viral membrane with the host cell membrane.'

With more advanced techniques, the structures since have become clear. In 2011, two separate teams-one at the National InstitutesofHealth'sVaccineResearchCenter (VRC) and the other at pharmaceutical firm

jama.com Novartis-usedx-raycrystallographytosolve theprotein'spostfusionstructuredowntothe atom.McLellanledtheVRC'sworkasapostdoctoralresearcherinthelaboratoryofstructural biologist Peter Kwong, PhD, in collaboration with Barney Graham, MD, PhD.

Soon after, however, a group in Spain demonstrated that prefusion, not postfusion, antibodies contributed most of RSV-IGIV's neutralizing effect. The finding suggested that vaccines based on the prefusion protein would produce a stronger immune response. But a major hurdle stood in the way: the RSV pre-F form is 'metastable,' which means it easily snaps into the post-F conformation, from which there is no turning back.

AKeyProtein Gets Characterized

Vaccine designers needed a way to lock the fusion protein in place before it shapeshifted.Thatadvancecamein2013,afterthe VRC group and teams in China and the Netherlands isolated 3 potently neutralizing RSV antibodies that were prefusionspecific. Employing a structural biologist's trick, McLellan used one of the antibodies, named D25, to bind F in its prefusion conformation and then turned to x-ray crystallography to solve its molecular structure. With that data in hand, 'we could actually just print out a 3D model and know where everyatomisinboththeprefusionandpostfusion [F],' he said.

While the post-F could be likened to a golf tee, the pre-F turned out to be lollipopshaped, with a large internal cavity that stored the virus's fusion peptide. In a crucial finding, D25 and the other 2 recently identified antibodies all bound to the same supersite on the protein, which disappeared after fusing with host cells.

'In its pre-F conformation,' Mejias said, 'theproteinhasspecificantigenicsitesthat induce the most potent neutralizing antibodies.Butassoonasthevirusgetsintouch with the host cell, it changes the structure, and these antigen sites are gone.'

The result is that the desired antibodies can't bind to the postfusion shape. 'And that means that if you want to make a vaccinethatcangeneratetheseverypotentantibodies,youneedtoimmunizewiththeprefusion form,' McLellan said.

The new atomic-level data from the D25-bound F structure showed McLellan wheretointroducegeneticmodificationsto stabilize the protein. 'We could engineer in

(Reprinted)

little molecular 'staples' that would lock the protein in the prefusion state,' he said.

Experiments in Graham's laboratory at theVRCdemonstratedthatDS-Cav1,oneversion of a prefusion stabilized RSV F protein containing the newly discovered binding supersite,elicitedneutralizingantibodytitersin macaques that were 70 to 80 times higher thanthepostfusionform.Withthisadvance, the VRC had a new RSV vaccine candidate.

Science hailed the VRC's work as a top breakthroughof2013.Atthetime,structurebased vaccine design was still in its infancy, andthestudieswereproofofconceptforthe newtechnique.

A few years later, the research team confirmedsuspicionsaboutthefailed1960s vaccine: the RSV virions it contained were studdedprimarilywithpostfusionFproteins. Unbeknownsttothedevelopers,astandard processtoinactivatetheviruswithhighheat and liquid formaldehyde inadvertently had triggered the widespread protein refolding.

The vaccine induced high levels of antibodies-just not the right ones. That made it ineffective and, for some, unsafe. In infants who hadn't previously encountered RSV,thevaccineprimedthemforaninflammatory response upon subsequent natural infection, causing enhancedrespiratorydisease. Older children didn't experience ERD in trials of the same vaccine candidate, likely because they had been primed by natural RSV infection earlier in life.

Putting a New Antigen to the Test

More recently, promising RSV vaccine candidates from Novavax and MedImmune failed in late-phase clinical trials involving older adults and pregnant individuals. But they were developed before the prefusion F was stabilized.

Inthesummerof2019,Graham,Kwong, McLellan, and their VRC colleagues publishedinterimresultsfromaphase1trial of DS-Cav1 in healthy adults. Four weeks after vaccination, virus neutralizing activity increased by a factor of 10. In last year's final readout, the levels were sustained above baseline for at least 44 weeks.

Other teams are putting DS-Cav1 to work, as well. A self-assembling nanoparticle studded with 20 copies of the antigen induced 10 times the neutralizing antibody activity as a single DS-Cav1 in a preclinical study. Pharmaceutical firm Icosavax is now testing the virus-like particle candidate, called IVX-121, in an early-phase trial.

JAMA January 18, 2022 Volume 327, Number 3

© 2021 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by Cancer Inst and Hospital - CAMS, li bai on 09/06/2026

205

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

News&Analysis

It's1of20RSVvaccineclinicaltrialsunderway as of this past September, according to the global nonprofit PATH. About half of the vaccinecandidatesareforolderadults,andthe restareintendedtoprotectchildren,eitherdirectly or through maternal vaccination.

MuchoftheRSVpreventionpipelinehas shifted toward using stabilized prefusion proteins. The candidate vaccines in current phase 3 trials, from GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen Pharmaceutical, and Pfizer, all use the pre-F antigen.

When asked to predict how the vaccine approvals will play out, Mejias said Janssen's adenoviral vector vaccine candidate for older adults, which recently demonstrated 80% efficacy in a phase 2b trial, mightbecomeavailablefirst.Amaternalvaccine could be next. And it's possible that within 5 years, a vaccine for children aged 6 months to 5 years could come to market. Amongother teams, Mejias and colleagues are developing live attenuated vaccine candidates for this age group.

In the meantime, a monoclonal antibody to protect all newborns could be just a year or 2 away. Palivizumab, the sole licensedRSVmonoclonal,isindicatedonlyfor premature and other high-risk infants and must be administered monthly during the RSVseason,whichtypicallyrunsfromaround NovemberthroughApril.Twopotent,longerlasting, single-dose products for the general infant population are in phase 3 trials.

One of these, AstraZeneca and Sanofi's nirsevimab,untilrecentlyknownasMEDI8897,

Volume 327, Number 3

is a modifiedversionoftheprefusion-specific antibody D25. AstraZeneca has said it plans to file for US Food and Drug Administration approval this year. A new monoclonal could change the pediatric RSV landscape because 'hopefully it will be provided to the whole birth population, not just a set of patients,' Mejias said.

In an ideal scenario, she noted, physicians in the not-too-distant future will have a full toolkit of options at their disposal to preventRSV.Aschedulemightstartwithmaternal vaccination in the third trimester or a monoclonalantibodyinjectionaroundbirth, eitherofwhichcouldprotectinfantsthrough the first 6 months of life until they could be vaccinated directly. People in older age, meanwhile, would have an annual vaccine.

Much of this vision, Mejias underscored, would not be possible without the VRC'sfoundationalstructuralbiologywork. As the developers of the virus-like protein candidate wrote, 'The recent generation of stabilized prefusion F antigens has breathed newlife into RSV vaccine development.'

Thepioneeringsciencealreadyhascontributed to perhaps the highest profile vaccine in history. In 2013, when McLellan left the VRC to start his own lab at Dartmouth, a novel pathogen called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus, or MERS-CoV, was circulating. 'Barney and I thought we should apply everything we had just learned on RSV to coronaviruses,' McLellan said, referring to Graham, who since has retired.

(Reprinted)

Workingwithsomeofthesamecollaborators, they solved a prefusion coronavirus spike protein conformation and identified modifications that would stabilize the MERS-CoV spike in its prefusion form. The same stabilizing modifications are used by Johnson&Johnson,Moderna,Novavax,and Pfizer-BioNTech in their COVID-19 vaccines,accordingtoMcLellan,whomovedhis lab to UT Austin in 2018.

Coming full circle, last November, Moderna began testing mRNA-1345-an investigational mRNA vaccine for RSV-in a phase 2 and 3 trial of older adults. The company also is studying the candidate, which codes for a prefusion stabilized F protein, in an early-phase trial including children as young as 12 months who already have RSV antibodies and therefore are unlikely to experience ERD.

Thebenefits for success are clear. 'The burden of RSV is tremendous,' Mejias said. 'Wejust need to keep going and be patient and persistent.'

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr McLellan is an inventor on several patents related to prefusion RSV F proteins and their use and has received license/royalty payments for them. His laboratory has received funding from MedImmune for a collaboration to characterize the monoclonal antibody MEDI8897 (nirsevimab) and from Janssen to characterize prefusion-stabilized RSV F proteins. Dr Mejias has received research grant support from Janssen and Merck (to institution); fees for participation on the Janssen, Merck, Roche, and Sanofi-Pasteur advisory boards; and fees from Sanofi-Pasteur for CME lectures.

Note: Source references are available through embedded hyperlinks in the article text online.

206

JAMA

January 18, 2022

© 2021 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by Cancer Inst and Hospital - CAMS, li bai on 09/06/2026

jama.com
