[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

S24

J A C C : C A R D I O V A S C U L A R I N T E R V E N T I O N S , V O L . 1 5 , N O . 4 , S U P P L S , 2 0 2 2

CRT-100.91

Impact of Coronary Artery Spasm on Long-Term Clinical Outcomes for Patients With Chest Pain Without Diabetes Mellitus in Korean Population

Seung-Woon Rha, Byoung Geol Choi, Se Yeon Choi, Jae Kyeong Byun, Jinah Cha, Byambasuren Battumur, Soohyung Park, Jieun Lee Cardiovascular Center, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of

BACKGROUND Previous studies have shown that increased insulin resistance in patients with chest pain without type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a risk factor for coronary artery spasm (CAS). Therefore, it is worthy to evaluate whether endothelial dysfunction such as CAS can be a major predictor of a major adverse cardiac and clinical event (MACCE) in these patients.

METHODS Patients were retrospectively enrolled using the electronic database of Korea University Guro Hospital from January 2004. A total of 1,046 patients without DM who underwent acetylcholine (ACH) provocation test were analyzed. Signi fi cant CAS was de fi ned as greater than 70% luminal narrowing of the artery in ACH provocation test. Subjects were divided into two groups: CAS group (n ¼ 593) and non-CAS group (n ¼ 453). All diagnosed CAS patients had subsequent optimal medication therapy along with an antianginal drug. Various clinical outcomes up to 5-year were estimated with Kaplan-Meier analysis. A propensity score matching (PSM) analysis was performed to adjust baseline confounders.

RESULTS After PSM analysis, two matched groups (316 pairs, 632 patients) were generated and their baselines characteristics were balanced. During the 5-year follow-up, there was no signi fi cant difference in the incidence of MACCE, all-cause death, myocardial infarction, stroke, recurrent angina, or new-onset DM between the CAS group and the non-CAS group.

CONCLUSIONS Optimal medication therapy along with an antianginal drug is important to an improve long-term clinical outcomes of patients with CAS without DM.

CRT-100.92

Fasting Versus Non-Fasting Prior to Elective Cardiac Catheterization: A Pilot Study

Hesham K. Abdelaziz, 1,2 Syed Haleem, 1 Mohamed Mostafa, 2 Charlotte Waterhouse, 1 Jonas Eichhofer 1

1 Lancashire Cardiac Centre, Blackpool Victoria Hospital, UK; 2 Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt

BACKGROUND There is little evidence available about the bene fi ts of pre-procedural fasting and prospective randomized trials are lacking with no clear guideline recommendations that advocate the bene fi t of fasting prior to cardiac catheterization.

OBJECTIVE To investigate the safety and feasibility of non-fasting prior to elective coronary catheterization.

METHOD Single-center, open label randomized control trial involving 50 patients who presented for elective coronary catheterization, randomized in 1:1 fashion to either standard hospital fasting policy that allows clear fl uids up to the time of the procedure and no food for at least 2 hours before the procedure (control arm) or allowed to drink and eat freely up to the point of transfer to the catheterization laboratory (intervention arm). Primary endpoint consisted of a composite of nausea, vomiting, peri-procedural abdominal pain, emergency intubation and aspiration. Other secondary end points included patient satisfaction score, incidence of hypoglycemia and hypotension, and 30-day chest infection rate.

RESULTS Our pilot study included 50 patients who were randomized to fasting group(n ¼ 25) and non-fasting group (n ¼ 25). There was no difference in the primary composite endpoint for safety between fasting and non-fasting group (4% vs 0, p ¼ 0.31). Compared to the fasting group, the non-fasting group had more diabetic patients (4% vs 24%, p ¼ 0.009),higher admission blood sugar (7  3 mmol/L vs 5  1 mmol/L, p ¼ 0.01), and shorter duration between last meal and the procedure (110  85 min vs 433  158, p ¼ 009). There was no statistically signi fi cant difference between the 2 groups in terms of the patient questionnaire results or patient satisfaction score.

CONCLUSION Non-fasting prior to cardiac catheterization is a safe and feasible approach that carries no additional risk compared to the standard practice of fasting. Limited number precluded any de fi nite conclusion with regard to the secondary endpoints. A further largescale trial is warranted to con fi rm the safety of this approach and to investigate other endpoints.

CRT-100.93

The Augmentation Index and Pulse-Wave Velocity in Hypertensive Pregnant Women

Archana Remala, Maddury Jyotsna, Kapil Karthikeya Reddy Challa, Achukatla Kumar Nizams Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, India

BACKGROUND Arterial stiffness is the surrogative marker for future cardiovascular events. During normal pregnancy there is increase in arterial stiffness from second trimester to term. We want to compare the augmentation index (Alx) and pulse wave velocity (PWV) which in turn re fl ects the article stiffness, in hypertensive pregnant women, with normotensive pregnant women.

METHODS An observational study was performed involving 50 pregnant women, between October 2020 and March 2021. Singleton pregnancies with mothers older than 18 years with 18 to 38 weeks of gestation satisfying inclusion criteria were included in this study. The assessment of AIx and the PWV of the right carotid artery was done using non-invasive sonographic wave intensity analysis.

RESULTS The mean age of population in this study is 24.98 years. 24 were primigravida and 26 were multigravida. Weeks at onset of hypertension was < 28 weeks in 11 , 28 to 32 weeks in 15 and 33 - 37 weeks in 8 women . 4 had chronic hypertension and in 12 normotensive blood pressure record was available before pregnancy . The mean systolic blood pressure is 154.3 þ /- 42.6 mm of Hg, mean diastolic pressure is 106 þ /- 22.1 mm of Hg. The Alx in Normotensive group is 32.33% þ /-10.09 and in Hypertensive group is 48.47% þ /- 7.63which was statistically signi fi cant (p ¼ 0.001). The increase in Alx and PWV in hypertensive pregnant women correlates more with increase in systolic blood pressure. The PWV in normotensive group is 5.58 þ /-0.37 m/s and hypertensive group is 6.03 þ /- 0.58 m/s with (p ¼ 0.01). Systolic blood pressure in correlation with Alx is rho 0.41 with (p < 0.004) and with PWV is 0.54 with (p < 0.001).

CONCLUSION There was augmented arterial stiffness in hypertensive pregnant women when compared to normotensive pregnant women.

CRT-100.94

Characteristics and Prognosis of Patients With Coronary Artery Ectasia: Data From a Tertiary-Care Center

Khaldoun Ben Hamda, Aiman Ghrab, Walid Jomaa, Ikram Chamtouri, Wajih Abdallah, Faouzi Maatouk Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia

BACKGROUND Coronary artery ectasia (CAE) is not a rare condition. Yet, it is often overlooked in daily practice. Prevalence of CAE in patients undergoing coronary angiography surpasses 5% in some series. We sought to study clinical and angiographic characteristics in patients diagnosed with CAE.

METHODS We analysed medical records from all patients who underwent coronary angiography in our center from 2015 to 2020. All angiograms were reviewed by an experienced operator to con fi rm CAE diagnosis. CAE were categorized using Markis classi fi cation. Group 1 included patients with Markis I and II and Group 2 those with Markis III and IV types. Long-term follow-up was reported. Major adverse
