[PDF_PAGE 1]
Clinical Study Protocol
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel
Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective,
Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
y)
OrTi@N
Protocol Number: XMEC-2023-002
Coordinating Center: Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University
Principal Investigator: Junwei Hao
Co-Principal Investigator: Qingfeng Ma
Department: Department of Neurology
Nature of the study: Investigator Initiated Trial
Funding: Major Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(82090043); CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD.
Protocol Version: Original protocol, Version 1.2, December 24, 2022
1

[PDF_PAGE 2]
Signature Page for Sponsors
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type
Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in
Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-
label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
The content and implementation of this protocol comply with the principles of
the "Declaration of Helsinki" and relevant ethical requirements, strictly
adhering to the provisions of "Good Clinical Practice (GCP)". The rights and
safety of patients are prioritized as the primary consideration, while ensuring
the authenticity and reliability of clinical trial results.
The Sponsor will establish, implement, and promptly update standard
operating procedures for the quality assurance and quality control systems in
accordance with GCP requirements. The entire process of clinical trials and
laboratory testing will follow quality management standard operating
procedures. Data managing will undergo quality control to verify the reliability
of all data and the accuracy of data processing.
The Sponsor guarantees the engagement of qualified biostatisticians, clinical
pharmacologists, and physicians to participate in the trial, including protocol
and case report form designing, trial implementation supervision, data
processing and verification, statistical analysis plan development, as well as
preparation of interim and final clinical study reports. Any issues identified
during the trial that may affect patient safety, implementation, or alter ethical
committee approval decisions will be promptly communicated to investigators,
trial institutions, and drug regulatory authorities.
Sponsor: Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University
Version: V1.2 Date: December 24, 2022
Signature:
Date:

2

[PDF_PAGE 3]
Signature Page for Site Researchers
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type
Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in
Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-
label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
We have reviewed this protocol and agree to its contents. | will conduct and
supervise this trial in strict accordance with the protocol. As a Principal
Investigator (PI), | will provide copies of this protocol and all related
documentation to all participating researchers. | will discuss these materials
with them to ensure that all personnel involving in the trial at our site fully
understand their responsibilities.
During the implementation, | will comply with all laws and regulations
governing clinical research and adhere to the provisions of this protocol and
GCP. Protecting patients' rights and welfare will remain paramount.
| will compliance with all requirements for ethical review and approval by the
Ethics Committee.
| will maintain complete and accurate medical records, ensuring they are
available for audit and inspection as required by relevant regulations.
| agree to promptly report to the Ethics Committee any modifications to trial
activities, as well as any unexpected issues involving risks to patients or
others. Furthermore, | will not implement any protocol amendments prior to
Ethics Committee approval, except when urgent modifications are necessary
to mitigate immediate risks to patient safety.
Version: V1.2 Date: December 24, 2022
Signature:
Date:

3

[PDF_PAGE 4]
Protocol Synopsis
Study Title Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large
Vessel Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter,
Prospective, Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial
Funding Major Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (82090043); CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical
(Guangzhou) Co., LTD
Objective To evaluate whether treatment with rhTNK-tPA, administered
between 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset can improve
neurological outcome in patients who have a non-large vessel
occlusion screened by perfusion imaging
Study Design A multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-
eee [ismiscser ene
Inclusion Criteria Clinical Inclusion Criteria
@ = Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
e@ Age 218 years
@ = Pre-stroke modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score 0-1
@ Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
4-25 (inclusive)
@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h of treatment initiation (onset
time refers to “last-seen-well”)
@ = Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible
representatives
Imaging inclusion criteria
@ = Target mismatch profile on computed tomography perfusion
(CTP) defined as an ischemic core volume (using regional
cerebral blood flow (rCBF)<30% on CTP) <50mL, a
mismatch ratio (time-to-maximum (Tmax)>6 sec volume to
ischemic core ratio) 21.2, and a mismatch volume (Tmax>6
sec volume- ischemic core volume) 210mL
Exclusion Criteria Clinical exclusion criteria
@ = Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours
@ = Contraindication to thrombolysis
@ Planned or anticipated treatment with endovascular therapy
@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if the judgement of
the managing clinician is likely to result in a NIHSS <4 at
randomization
@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in women of
4

[PDF_PAGE 5]
childbearing potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ = Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation
factor deficiency

@ Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or
anticoagulant use. If on warfarin, international normalized
ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin time >15s; if use of any
direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if use of
heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ Use of glycoprotein IIb-IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/yL

@ Known severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration
rate <30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known
severe adverse reactions to contrast agents

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ = Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

e@ = Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last 1
month, e.g. gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than
skin rash) to contrast agents

@ = Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood
pressure >185mmHg or diastolic blood
pressure >110mmHg)

@ = Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be
expected to survive more than half a year

@ Current participation in any investigational study that may
confound outcome assessment of the study

e@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is
inappropriate for participation in the trial or could impose
hazards to the patient (e.g. inability to understand and/or
follow the study procedures and/or follow-up due to mental
disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

e@ = = Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute large vessel occlusion on magnetic resonance/
computed tomography angiography, including internal
carotid artery (ICA), middle cerebral artery M1 segment
(MCA-M1) , vertebral artery and basilar artery

@ = Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to
be >1/3 MCA territory

Study Drug Active drug: rhTNK-tPA freeze-dried powder injection, 1.0
1071U/16mg per vial
Control drug: aspirin, size: 100mg or
5

[PDF_PAGE 6]
clopidogrel, size: 75mg

Bought and provided free of charge by the sponsor.

Treatment Assignment | Patients will be randomized to rhTNK-tPA or antiplatelet therapy,
in a 1:1 ratio with minimization algorithm.

Interventional arm (rhTNK-tPA)

The recommended total dose for this study is weight-based with

0.25mg of rhTNK-tPA per kg, not exceeding a maximum dose of

25mg. Each vial is reconstituted with 3ml sterile water for
injection by gentle shaking until completely dissolved. Vigorous
shaking should be avoided to prevent foam formation, which may
reduce efficacy. A single bolus dose should be administered over

5-10 seconds based on patient weight.

Control arm (antiplatelet therapy)

Antiplatelet therapy at the discretion of local investigators

according to Chinese Guidelines for Diagnosis and Treatment of

Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018.

All patients will be treated according to Chinese Guidelines for

Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018 and

Chinese Guideline for the Secondary Prevention of Ischemic

Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack 2022.

Criteria for Evaluation | Primary efficacy endpoint

@ Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an
mRS of 0-1 at 90 (+7) days

Secondary efficacy endpoints

© Ordinal mRS score at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an
mRS of 0-2 at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) h,
defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by
CTP

@ = Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT
scan at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume
(rCBF<30% by CTP)

@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 (-
2/+12) h, defined as a NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop
of 28 from baseline

@ NIHSS change from baseline at 7 (+2) days/discharge
(whichever is earlier)

Safety endpoints

@ Proportion of patients with symptomatic intracranial
hemorrhage (sICH) within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification

@ Proportion of patients with any intracranial hemorrhage (ICH)
within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg bleeding classification

6

[PDF_PAGE 7]
@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, as defined
by The Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue
Plasminogen Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries
(GUSTO): moderate and severe bleeding

@ = Mortality at 90 (+7) days

Study Schedule Baseline, 0 h, 24 (-2/+12) h, 48 (+6) h, 7 (+2) days/discharge
(whichever is earlier), 90 (+7) days

Sample Size The total sample size is 568. A total of 568 enrolled patients will
be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to the Interventional arm (rhTNK-
tPA, 284 cases) and control arm (antiplatelet therapy, 284 cases).

Interim Analysis One efficacy interim analysis will be taken place when 50% of the
target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow-up.
The data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) will review the
data at the planned interim analysis and may recommend
stopping the study early for safety concerns, efficacy results or
futility.

Statistical Analysis The efficacy analyses will be based on intention-to-treat (ITT)
population. The generalized linear model was used to compare
the proportion of patients with socre of 0-1 on the modified
Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the treatment and control
groups. At the efficacy interim analysis, where the primary
analysis will be performed on 50% of total patients (284) have
completed the 90-day follow-up, a type I error of 0.003 will be
allocated for the efficacy evaluation. If the study continues
beyond the efficacy interim analysis, the final efficacy analysis will
be performed at the 0.049 significance level to maintain an
overall type I error rate of 0.05.

Subgroup Analysis The predefined subgroups including:

@ Age (<65 years and 2 65 years);

@ = Time from symptom onset to randomization (4.5-9 hours, 9-
24 hours and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and 2 16);

@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior
circulation);

@ Medium vessel occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA-M4
segment of MCA, ACA, and PCA);

@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and 2100 mg/dL);

© Baseline systolic blood pressure ($140 mmHg and >140
mmHg).

7

[PDF_PAGE 8]
Table of Contents
Signature Page for SDONSOFS ........sccsessessesssessssssnesseesecseeseeseesssseessssnsenseneessesseneeseseeseseeesn
Signature Page for Site RESCArChers........cecsescsessecseesneesneesseesseecneeesecsecseesneesssesseeeneeeseee
Protocol SYNOPSIS .........-secsecsesessessesseseeseeeeseenecneeseesessesseesteeasensenseneenesneesessesnesssesesseseeesensenee
Table of Contents ......sessescsessessseesneesneessnenseecnecnnensnessneesnessaessnesnasennessnessnessnessnersneesseesneessees 8
List of Abbreviations........ccsesssecsecsnessnecsseesssecssessessecsnecsnessssesseecnsesssessecssecsnessseensecssecesees 1
1. BACKGrOUNG .....eseseecsecsessessessneeseenesneeneesecueeneeseeeesaeeeneenecnseneeseesesnteaesstsseeseeenseatentensenseneeeee 1S,
2. ODJOCHIVE .....sseeesseesstessecsneesneesnecsneesneccsecsuecsnecnnessnecsstesneccssessecsuecsuessnessneesnessnessneetseesseeess 1D.
3. Study DOSIQN......esssessescsessnessseesseesseecssessessecsnecsnecsseesssessessessessnessneesseesseesseesseesseesseeess 1B.
3.1 Overall DeSIQN «0... cccscceeseeeeeseesseeseseeesessesesnesssnessseeseseessseenesestessstesesesssseensseeneesses 1G
3.2 POPUIALION.....seecseecsessneesneesneesneeeseesneecnsecssecsuecsnecsneceseessescneessesssecssecsnessnessnecsneesnees 1B
3.2.1 INCIUSION Criteria .........eseeeseesssesseessseesseessecssecsseessecsseesseessessnecssecssecssecsssesses 1G
3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria «2.0.0... ccsesseseseeeseeeseesesessessseesssesasseessssnsseensessesesseeseeeneee VE
3.3 Randomization and BIINding .......sssssessecseesecsneesneesneesneecnsesssecsecnessneesneesneeenees 1B
3.3.1 RANGOMIZALION ......ceeseecssecsseeeseesseesseeessesssecsecsnecssecssecsseecssesssecssecsneesnecsssesses 1B.
3.3.2 Blind DOSIQN ..........ccsecsesessesesseseseeseseessseessseesssssesassesesseeesseeesareetsreesitaessseessee 1D.
3.4 Therapeutic Strategies .........csecsessecsecsecsecsecsneesnecsnecsneeensessecsnecsnessneesneesneeenees 1D
3.4.1 Administration ADPrOaCh ........esseecsescsseesteeseesseeeseesseesssessesssessecsseesseeeseessee 1)
3.4.2 Concomitant Therapy ........essesereesesersesersesersesssessseesseesssesessesessesesseeesererste QO
3.4.3 Pharmaceutical INCOMpatibilitY .........ececsecsnessneesseesneeenseestessecsneesneesneesee ZO.
3.5 Drug ACCOUNtADIIity eee eeseeseeceeceeesessecseeseeseeeseneeneenecueeseeseceeseneeeesententenesneeneeseeee 2 T
3.5.1 Pharmaceutical PaCkaging .......sssecssessssesseesnecneesneesneesnessneesneerneesnersneesn 2d
3.5.2 Storage CONILION ........scecceecsessecsecsneeenecsseesseesseeesessecsnecsseessiesseeseesseesne ld
3.5.3 Management, Dispensing, Recycle and DiSpOSe...........ccccseeeectereenee 21
3.6 Study SCHEGUIC «00... esseessessescnessneesnecsneesneesseesstecncensessnecssscnseenseesnecsuecnsetsneesneesnes 2
3.6.1 Visit 0 (Baseline, RANdOMIZAtION) .........ecseecsesseeseesseesseesstesseeenesseeseeneee 2D
3.6.5 Visit 4 (7 [+2] days /discharge [whichever is earlier]) ..........cecceeeeeeeeee 24
3.6.6 Visit 5 (90 [+7] daYS) ....seescsssessesseesesseeseesessnsssessssessssessesssseeseesesessnesseseseneeses 2D.
3.7 Endpoints of the Climical Trial ........csssssesssesssscsecsseesneessecsseesssesssesseessessseesseesneessees 20
3.7.1 Efficacy EMGDOint «0.0... ccsesessesesseseseessseesssesscsesessssesesseeesssenssneassseesansesisaeessse 20.
3.7.2 Safety EMADOINts .......csseeccseesssesssecsecsneessecssecsnecenecsssesssecsessneesnecsneseneesssessne 2D
4, Data Management ........seeceeseesecsesseeeesenseneeseenecneesesseseesseeseenesaseseeeesneesneensenseneensenseneeseete 20
4.1 Data entry and MOnitoring.......seessecsseseeeneersesnesnesssersneesneesneesnessneenersnensneesneess 20)
4.2 Data Quality ASSUPANCE........seecseesseesecsneseseeeseesseecseessecssecsnecsnesssnesseecnsessessseesseess 20)
4.3 Database LOCK... ceccecececsecseseessesneeseesesseeseeseseeseneensenesnsestesessesseeeseseneeneeneeneee 20,
5. Statistical Considerations and Analysis Plan ........ssssssessseesssesnesnesseesneesneesnessneesseesneees 2
5.1 SAMPIe SIZE o.....seseseesssesssecsseeesecsssesseesseecssesssecsnecsnessnecsseesseesssessecssecsnesssesssecsneesnees OL
5.2 Analysis POpulation ..........cccccccesssseteseeteseereseeesesnessseeneseenesssnesesesesnesessensseesseeneneeee 2D

8

[PDF_PAGE 9]
5.3 Statistical ANALYSIS .........sssssessseesstesneesneeseesnecsneesnessnessseesnesssnessnessnessnessneesneesneesnee 2B
5.3.1 General Principles........sseccsecsssesseecseesseesneesecsneesnecsseesseecssessnecsseesneesneesssense 2D
5.3.2 Summaries of Conduct Of Study 0.0... ceeccssesseeeneeseeneseeteeeeeseenesesteneaeeree 2D.
5.3.3 Summaries of Demographic and Baseline Characteristics... 29
5.3.4 Compliance to TreatMent.......ssecsecsessecsecsneesseesseessecsesssesseesneesseessnense®
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy ENGpOInt ...........cesessesessesessesessessenessseensssensstensseasseeeseaneee 2D.
5.3.7 Missing Data ProceSSing ......ssecsessesseenecsneesneesseesneecneessseeseenessneeeneesee OO.
5.3.8 Safety ANAlYSES........sesessescseeessessecsecsneesseesseesneesseessiessecsesseessessesserseeene OT
5.3.9 SUBQrOUP ANAlYSIS .........ssesesseseseeseseeseseessseeeseeestseeesseensseensseensstesseeteseaeenee OT

6. Assessment Of Safety ......eecsscseccneecnsersecnecseesneesnecsnessnecssecsnsecsnessneesnecsneesneesnsesseseneeete Ol

6.1 Definitions of AE ANd SAE... secssecseesseesseesseesssecssesssesssecsneesseesssessecsnessneeseesee OO
6.1.1 Examples Of An AE... essesesseseseesesesesessesesessssessssesesseensesssasensessesesseensaeensts
6.1.2 Events not Meeting the AE Definition .........cseessecssesecnesseeseeneenneeeeenne OD
6.1.3 Examples Of an SAE .......sceceeceesessecseseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeneeeeeseeseeneeeneeeseeeeeneeeeeneeee OO,
6.1.4 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR).......35

6.2 AE and SAE Reporting Period .......s.scseesssesssecsecsneesneesseesneesneesseesssecsesseenneesneeesees OD

6.3 Follow-Up Of AE/SAE 0... .ccesscsesessesesseeseeseseeesesnesesnereseenesesnesesesesnesesneseseeseseeneseees OO

6.4 Recording and Severity Categorization Of AE aNd SAE ........sesseeseeseeseeseesneseeeen BO
6.4.1 Recording Of AE/SAE .......ssesssseseesseesseessecsecsnessneesseesseesseesssesssecsnessneesseesee OO
6.4.2 Severity Categorization ..........sescesesecseseeseseeseseeneseenenssseneesensseeteseeneseeneseaeerese OO,
6.4.3 Assessment of Causality of AE and SAE... essssessecneesneeseesneesneeeeeneee OT

6.5 Reporting Requirements Of SAE ........essesecseeseesneesseesneesseesstessecseesessneesneeesee OO

6.6 Reporting SAE to the SPONSOP ..........seecseesseesteeseeseseeeseetesesteasseeesseseseesneeneesees OO

6.7 Management of Patients Who Experience AE .......cssesessnsesssesneeneeseeseeneesees OD

7. Ethical Considerations ..........scccssecssecssesssecsecsneesnecsssesseesseessesseesseesneesssessessessesseeessees Ad

7.1 Informed COnsent .......ccscccesssceesseesseessesssesrsssseessseesssesesessssensssesetsssetessetseeeeee Ad

7.2 Benefits and Risks Of the Study ......cssseccssssesssecsecsessneesnecsneeeneecsserssecnessneeeseess Ad
7.2.1 Potential Benefit and Risk in Interventional AIM..........ssessececseeneenee 42
7.2.2 Potential Benefit and Risk in Control AIM.......c.csescsseeesssessteretereeseeeeeere AD,
7.2.3 RiSk-benefit RAtiO......reccecsserecnecsneesnecsecsneecneesssessecnessneesnecsneesneeesnente AS

7.3 Confidentiality 0.0.0... cccsseseeseeseesseesseeessesseessecseesecsseesseessiesseesssecseesessecsneesn ee AG

7.4 Study Discontinuation or Withdraw Criteria .......sssessesneesneesstecneeneeseeseeneesnen 4
7.4.1 Discontinuation of Individual Patients ..........sscscssesecneeseesecseesneeeneense Ad
7.4.2 Withdrawal Criteria of Individual Patients .............:ceecseeseeeeeeeeeee ee AB
7.4.3 Study DiSCONtINUATION «0... eesseseecseeesnessneesnecsneesneetstesssenessnecsnessneesneessness AD
7.4.4 Management of Patients Discontinuation or Withdrawal... 46

8. Study Management and Monitoring ............cescesesessesessesesteseseeseseeesestestseenssesseseensseenes eee AO

8.1 Protocol AMENAMENES .......sescsessssesseecneecsecsecsnecsneesnecsnecsneeeneessecsnecsnessnessneesneessee AG

8.2 Quality CONION........cesssecssecseesseesseesseesssesseesssecsecsneesneessesseessessessecsessneesecsneess ee AG
8.2.1 Study Monitoring of the SDOMSOF ..........cesesessesesseseeesseeeeeeeneesetensstenseeeeseeee AB
8.2.2 Study Monitoring of the Sites ........ecesseeseesneeeneeesecnecneesneesnecsneesneeenseene Al
8.2.3 Site INSPECtIONS ........seecseecceeessesseecsseeseestecsecsseessecsseesseecsnessnecsecsneesneensees AQ

Q. Organizational Structure ..........ceseceesesecesesesseseesssesssseseseseessseesssensssesessenessssetessenesseeeeese AQ

9.1 Trials Boards and COMMIttCeS .......scecssecsecsecsneesneesneesneeeneeessecseecnessneesseesneeesee AQ

9

[PDF_PAGE 10]
9.1.1 Steering COMMITEE ......ereecerecseesneesneesneesneesneetstesneenessnessnessneesneeeseess AG

9.1.2 Executive COMMItECE .......cecececsecsneeeeessecsneeeneesseessessessnessnecsneeeseessresse AQ

9.1.3 Data Safety and Monitoring Board... escssessssesseseseetesseesseneseeterestereseere AQ,

9.1.4 Clinical Events COMMIttee ........ecessesseesecsneesneesseesneecneeestesseenneesneesseesses OO.

9.1.5 Imaging Core Laboratory .......ssescseesssessecsecsnessnecsseesseesseessesseessessneesseese OO.

9.2 Site Training and Certification «20.0... ccc eeteseeeseenesesteseseeseseeessseeseeeeeseeseses OO.

10. Study Report and Publications ........seeseccsesseeseesecsneeeneesneesneecneeeseeseesneeeneeeseeeneeenee OT
10.1 Study Registration and RESUItS.........esecsessessesseesneesneeseesseesneessessecseeseeee DT
10.2 Publication Of RESUItS ...........secseseesesessesesseseseessseesseensseenessstensstessensisseesseersseaeeres OT

11. Funding and Conflict of Interest ........scccsessseesssesneecnseesessecsecsneesneesnecsneseneeseeneesnensees OD
12. REFEFENCES......eecsescsecsseesseesseecssessseessecsnecssscsscnsessessnesssecssecssessseessessessessnesssecsnecsseest+ OD
Appendix 1: modified Rankin SCale..........ccecseseseesesestesesresesseseseesssetesenesessessetetassetesseeesesees OO
Appendix 2: National Institutes of Health Stroke SCAl€.........sesescsessneesneeseesneeeneesseesseeet OO.
Appendix 3: Glasgow Coma Scale .........escesecseeeeseceeessesseeseseeesesensenseneseseeneeteeeseeensenseees OF
Appendix 4: EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire ...........ccseceeseeseeseeeeeseeeesee OD

10

[PDF_PAGE 11]
List of Abbreviations
Upand Late Presenting Strokes Undergoing Neurointervention with Trevo
Deficits
[ef esipnrs eae
The International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
1

[PDF_PAGE 12]
Par [Reet Resones map
a
12

[PDF_PAGE 13]
1. Background
Large vessel occlusion (LVO) is a common cause of acute ischemic stroke
(AIS) and usually defined as obstruction of proximal vessels, including the
internal carotid artery (ICA), first segment of the middle cerebral artery (MCA-
M1), vertebral artery and basilar artery. The therapeutic time window for
endovascular therapy (EVT) in acute anterior circulation LVO has been
extended to 24 hours [1,2]. For patients within 4.5 hours from symptom onset
(defined as last-seen-well), bridging therapy is recommended. For those
within 4.5-6 hours from symptom onset, EVT should be considered with
routine imaging assessment. For patients with anterior circulation LVO within
6-24 hours from onset, EVT should be performed if meeting DWI or CTP
Assessment with Clinical Mismatch in the Triage of Wake-Up and Late
Presenting Strokes Undergoing Neurointervention with Trevo (DAWN) or
Endovascular Therapy Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic Stroke
(DEFUSE-3) eligibility criteria [1,3-5]. Since the completion of Endovascular
Treatment for Acute Basilar Artery Occlusion (ATTENTION) trial and Basilar
Artery Occlusion Chinese Endovascular Trial (BAOCHE), EVT in posterior
circulation LVO within 24 hours from onset has been proven effective and
safe [6,7].
Current level 1A EVT recommendations for AIS are restricted to patients with
LVO, while less is known about the effectiveness and safety of EVT in
patients with non-LVO. Small/perforating vessel occlusion is not suitable for
EVT due to its small caliber. Distal medium vessel occlusion (DMVO) includes
the M2 to M4 MCA segment, anterior cerebral artery (ACA), posterior cerebral
artery (PCA), posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and superior
cerebellar artery (SCA) [8]. The longer, more tortuous access route and
thinner arterial walls potentially increase the risk of dissection, perforation,
and vasospasm. DMVO loop around key neuroanatomic structures including
the corpus callosum, insula, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe. With

13

[PDF_PAGE 14]
advancement of techniques and technologies, the feasibility of EVT for DMUVO
has been demonstrated by several non-randomized studies. However, data
from randomized, controlled trials are lacking on whether EVT is also
beneficial in persons with occlusion of medium or distal vessels [5,9]. Other
non-LVO (e.g. watershed infarction caused by intracranial/extracranial
stenosis) also lack evidence for EVT. Intravenous thrombolysis is the only
proven effective reperfusion therapy in patients with non-LVO.

Only 5-20% of AIS patients receive intravenous thrombolysis, and this small
proportion is mainly related to the short therapeutic time window (4.5 hours)
[10]. Computed tomography perfusion (CTP) or perfusion weighted imaging
(PWI) enable the differentiation of salvageable ischemic tissue beyond 4.5
hours from onset [11]. Previous study showed that there may be salvageable
brain tissue as late as 24 hours in approximately half of AIS patients [12].
Reperfusion induced by intravenous thrombolysis may improve clinical
outcomes in the extended time window [13-15]. The Echoplanar Imaging
Thrombolytic Evaluation Trial (EPITHET) enrolled 101 patients within 3-6
hours after symptom onset, among whom 85 (86%) showed PWI-diffusion-
weighted imaging (DWI) mismatch. The study found no significant benefit of
intravenous thrombolysis [16]. The fourth European Cooperative Acute Stroke
Study (ECASS-4) included 119 AIS patients within 4.5-9 hours after onset
with PWI-DWI mismatch, but did not demonstrate better functional outcomes
in the alteplase (rt-PA) group [17]. The Extending the Time for Thrombolysis
in Emergency Neurological Deficits (EXTEND) trial enrolled 225 AIS patients
within 4.5-9 hours after onset with CT/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
core-perfusion mismatch, showing a higher rate of favorable outcomes in the
rt-PA group (modified Rankin scale (MRS) 0-1: 35.4% vs. 29.5%, p = 0.04)
[18]. While a previous meta-analysis of the EXTEND, ECASS-4:ExTEND, and
EPITHET trials indicated that the rt-PA group had a higher proportion of
excellent functional outcome compared to the placebo group (mRS 0-1:36%
vs. 29%, adjusted odds ratio (aOR) =1.86, 95% confidence interval (Cl),1.15-

[PDF_PAGE 15]
2.99, p = 0.01), there was a higher incidence of symptomatic intracranial
hemorrhage (sICH) (5% vs. <1%, AOR=9.7, 95%Cl,1.23-76.55, p = 0.03), and
no significant difference in mortality (14% vs. 9%, AOR=1.55, 95%Cl, 0.81-
2.96, p = 0.19)[15]. Further subgroup analysis including 303 patients with
core-perfusion mismatch and completed 90-day assessment showed that the
rt-PA group had a higher proportion of excellent functional outcome compared
to the placebo group, with a larger point estimate of effect size (mRS 0-1:
36% vs. 26%, AOR=2.06, 95%CI, 1.17-3.62, p = 0.01). In this subgroup
analysis, all efficacy outcomes were significantly improved in the rt-PA group,
and safety outcomes showed no significant differences compared to the
placebo group. Additionally, the effect of rt-PA was independent of the
presence of LVO (pinteraction=0.99), suggesting that non-LVO patients selected
by perfusion imaging in the extended time window may benefit from
intravenous thrombolysis.
In summary, intravenous thrombolysis may be a safe and effective
reperfusion treatment for acute non-LVO patients selected by perfusion
imaging in the extended time window. Recombinant human TNK tissue-type
plasminogen activator (rhTNK-tPA), a genetically modified variant of rt-PA,
exhibits higher fibrin specificity and longer half-life, allowing single bolus
administration. Existing data suggest that this novel thrombolytic agent is as
safe as rt-PA, with trends toward higher rates of vascular recanalization and
favorable functional outcomes [19-23]. Therefore, we design a multicenter,
prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point (PROBE) trial to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of rhoTNK-tPA in acute non-LVO patients
presenting within 4.5-24 hours after onset and selected by perfusion imaging.
2. Objective
To test efficacy and safety of intravenous rhTNK-tPA in patients presenting
within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have a non-LVO and evidence
of salvageable tissue on perfusion imaging.

15

[PDF_PAGE 16]
3. Study Design
3.1 Overall Design
This is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point,
controlled clinical trial. Participants are randomly assigned to receive rhTNK-
tPA or antiplatelet therapy.
(Rk)
f I
Teetnad ih ‘Artpoteet therapy
|
. T
Figure 1. Study Flow Chart
3.2 Population
3.2.1 Inclusion Criteria
Clinical inclusion criteria
@ Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
@ Age 218 years
@ Pre-stroke mRS score 0-1
@ Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) 4-25
(inclusive)
@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h of treatment initiation (onset time refers to
“last-seen-well”)
@ Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible
representatives
16

[PDF_PAGE 17]
Imaging inclusion criteria

e Target mismatch profile on CTP defined as an ischemic core volume (using
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF)<30% on CTP) <50mL, a mismatch ratio
(Time-to-maximum (Tmax)>6 sec volume to ischemic core ratio) 21.2, and
a mismatch volume (Tmax>6 sec volume- ischemic core volume) 210mL

3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria

Clinical exclusion criteria

@ Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours

@ Contraindication to thrombolysis

@ Planned or anticipated treatment with endovascular therapy

@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if in the judgement of the
managing clinician is likely to result ina NIHSS <4 at randomization

@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in women of childbearing
potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation factor
deficiency

@ Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or anticoagulant use.
If on warfarin, international normalized ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin
time >15s; if use of any direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if
use of heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ Use of glycoprotein I[b-IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/ u L

@ Known severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate <30mL/min
or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe adverse
reactions to contrast agents

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

17

[PDF_PAGE 18]
@ Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last 1 month, e.g.
gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than skin rash) to
contrast agents

@ Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >185mmHg or
diastolic blood pressure >110mmHg)

@ = Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be expected to survive
more than half a year

@ Current participation in any investigational study that may confound
outcome assessment of the study

@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is inappropriate
for participation in the trial or could impose hazards to the patient (e.g.
inability to understand and/or follow the study procedures and/or follow-up
due to mental disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

@ Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute LVO on MRICT angiography, including ICA, MCA-M1, vertebral
artery and basilar artery

@ Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to be >1/3 MCA
territory

3.3 Randomization and Blinding

3.3.1 Randomization

Eligible patients are randomized to treatment with either rhTNK-tPA or

antiplatelet therapy with a ratio of 1:1. Randomization uses a minimization

process to balance the numbers of patients across the two arms with respect

to age (<65 or 265 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or 216) and center.

The randomization will be done by a computerized central interactive web

response system (IWRS). Once the patient meets all eligibility criteria and the

consent is signed, the center investigator will enter basic patient information

18

[PDF_PAGE 19]
and minimization factors into IWRS and the system will generate a random
number and subject ID according to the above principles. After receiving the
results of randomization, the center investigator will assign patients to the
appropriate treatment according to the grouping as soon as possible.
Patients not eligible after screening in IWRS will be recorded as screen
failures and not be enrolled.
3.3.2 Blind Design
This study is an open-label trial. An unbiased investigator, who is blinded to
the allocated assignment and actual treatment, will assess the in-hospital data
relevant to the study outcomes. Assessments of the primary endpoint on the
mRS at 90 (+7) days will be performed by a qualified neurologist via
centralized telephone interview, blinded to the allocated and actually received
treatment. The interviewee should be the patient themselves or co-residing
caregivers. All telephone interviews are recorded into follow-up reports, which
will be then assessed by another neurologist, blinded to the allocated and
actually received treatment, based on the reports.
3.4 Therapeutic Strategies
3.4.1 Administration Approach
Interventional arm: rhTNK-tPA
Patients allocated in this arm will receive intravenous thrombolysis with
rhTNK-tPA (0.25mg/kg, not exceeding a maximum dose of 25mg). Each vial
is reconstituted with 3 mL sterile water for injection by gentle shaking until
completely dissolved. Vigorous shaking should be avoided to prevent foam
formation, which may reduce efficacy. A single bolus dose should be
administered over 5-10 seconds based on patient weight.
Control arm: Antiplatelet therapy
Antiplatelet therapy is administered at the discretion of local investigators*.
*Aspirin (150-300mg) is offered to patients allocated in the control arm, unless
contraindicated. According to Chinese Guidelines for Diagnosis and

19

[PDF_PAGE 20]
Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018, 150-300mg aspirin alone is
recommended for acute stroke treatment in patients who are otherwise
eligible for intravenous thrombolysis or EVT as soon as possible (Class 1 of
recommendation, Level A of evidence). The aspirin dose can be changed to
50-300 mg/day after the acute phase. Clopidogrel is indicated as an
alternative in case of aspirin intolerance (Class 2 of recommendation, Level C
of evidence) [24].
All study drugs should be administered as soon as possible within 1 hour after
randomization.
3.4.2 Concomitant Therapy
All the enrolled patients are treated according to Chinese Guidelines for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018 and Chinese
Guideline for the Secondary Prevention of Ischemic Stroke and Transient
Ischemic Attack 2022 [24,25]. Patients who have received intravenous
thrombolysis or who are intended to receive intravenous thrombolysis are
excluded. Also, those who are planned or anticipated to treat with EVT are
excluded from the study (as described in 3.2.2). Any anti-platelet agent is
prohibited for 24 hours after the rhnTNK-tPA administration, including aspirin,
clopidogrel, ticagrelor, glycoprotein IIb/Illa receptor. Oral or parenteral
anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin, dabigatran, heparin, low molecular weight
heparin, argatroban) are prohibited for the first 24 hours in interventional and
control arms.
Concomitant therapy consists of any medication used by a patient in addition
to protocol-mandated treatment for 7 days prior to initiation of study drug to
the completion/discontinuation visit. All such medications should be reported
to the investigator and recorded on the electronic Case Report Form (eCRF).
3.4.3 Pharmaceutical Incompatibility
rhTNK-tPA should be prepared using sterile water for injection; normal saline
(0.9% sodium chloride) or glucose solutions are not recommended. rhTNK-
20

[PDF_PAGE 21]
tPA must not be mixed with other medications, neither in the same syringe nor
through the same intravenous line (including heparin).
3.5 Drug Accountability
3.5.1 Pharmaceutical Packaging
The sponsor will package medications according to the total dosage required
per patient. Packaging and labeling will comply with regulatory and legal
requirements, clearly marked as "For Clinical Research Use Only". All kits will
be delivered by Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University to participating
centers.
3.5.2 Storage Condition
The study drugs are provided by the sponsor. Authorized personnel are
responsible for receiving the investigational medicinal products at each
research center. Personnel in each research center should strictly comply with
the regulations outlined in Good Clinical Practice (GCP). All study drugs must
be managed strictly abiding to requirements by the sponsor.
At centers, study medication must be stored in a secure place with restricted
access to qualified personnel until dispensed to patients. Study drugs are
exclusively for research use in this trial and should not be delivered for other
purposes.
The investigators should ensure that study drugs are used only in accordance
with the approved protocol.
3.5.3 Management, Dispensing, Recycle and Dispose
The storage and shipment of study drugs are strictly in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Responsible personnel should know and
establish a detailed record for the receipt, storage, distribution and recycling
of study drugs. All the study drugs are delivered on the prescriptions of the
researchers and documented upon delivery and recycling. Center
investigators are prohibited from offering the study drugs for other purposes.
After enrollment, authorized research nurses will prepare and administer

21

[PDF_PAGE 22]
intravenous rhTNK-tPA or dispense oral drugs as per the protocol. Unused
study drugs are required to be recycled and disposed of according to relevant
regulations and corresponding records must be retained.
3.6 Study Schedule
The study consists of three periods: screening (VO), treatment (V1) and follow
up (V2, V3, V4, V5). If a suspected or confirmed adverse event (AE) occurs,
necessary assessment can be performed. Such visits must be documented in
both eCRF and original records.
Procedure/ Screening Treatment Follow-up
Investigation vo V1 v2 V3 V4 V5
Time Baseline Oh 24 48 7 (+2) days 90 (+7)
(-2/+12) h (46)h —— /discharge 9 days
Informed consent x
Inclusion/exclusion criteria x
Demographic data # Xx
Medical history > x
Concomitant medication x x x x x
Vital signs © x xX xX xX
ECG x
Laboratory tests 4 x x
Imaging ° x x x*
mRS‘ x x x
NIHSS x x x x
Gcs Xx Xx x Xx
EQ-5D-5L x
BI x
Randomization x
Study medication administration x
AEs/SAEs x x x x x
Study completion x
Abbreviation: AEs, Adverse Events; BI, Barthel index; ECG, electrocardiography; EQ-5D-
5L, EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; mRS,
Modified Rankin Scale; NIHSS, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale; SAEs, Serious
Adverse Events.
@ Demographic data include date of birth, sex, ethnic group, body height, body weight.
> Medical history include history of present illness, past medical history, family history,
drug allergies, smoking and alcohol use.
Vital signs include temperature, blood pressure and heart rate.
‘Laboratory tests include hematology, liver and renal function, coagulation profile and
22

[PDF_PAGE 23]
glucose; pregnancy test is limited to women of child bearing potential.

°Brain CT+CTA +CTP.

‘Baseline mRS is defined as a pre-stroke score.

8 Whichever is earlier.

*Repeat CT is recommended, if possible; if symptom deterioration with suspected

intracranial hemorrhage occurs during hospitalization, an immediate CT scan should be

performed.

3.6.1 Visit 0 (Baseline, Randomization)

For each patients deemed eligible for the study by the investigator written

informed consent will be contained from the patient or the patient’s

representative prior to the performance of any protocol-related investigation.

During the screening period, the following assessments will be performed in

patients for whom written informed consent has been obtained:

@ Checking of inclusion and exclusion criteria

@ Collection of demographic data (date of birth, sex, ethnic group, body
height, body weight)

@ Collection of medical history (history of present illness, past medical
history, family history, drug allergies, smoking and alcohol use)

@ Collection of concomitant medication (one week prior to randomization)

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

e@ A 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG)

@ Screening laboratory tests including blood routine, renal and liver
function, coagulation profile and glucose; pregnancy test in women of
childbearing potential (urinary test)

@ Imaging examination (a brain CT+CTA+CTP scan)

@ Pre-stroke mRS score

@ Baseline NIHSS score

e@ Assessment of the Glasgow coma scale (GCS)

Patients who meet the inclusion criteria but not the exclusion criteria will be

randomized.

3.6.2 Visit 1(0 h)

@ Administration of the study drug (the study medication has to be

[PDF_PAGE 24]
administered as soon as possible and not later than 60 minutes after
randomization)

@ Assessment of AE/ serious adverse events (SAE)

3.6.3 Visit 2 [24 (-2/+12) h

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

e@ Laboratory tests including blood routine, liver and renal function, glucose
and coagulation profile

@ Imaging examination (a brain CT+CTA+CTP scan)

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.6.4 Visit 3 [48 (+6) h]

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.6.5 Visit 4 (7 [+2] days /discharge [whichever is earlier])

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

@ Imaging examination (a repeat CT scan is recommended, if possible; if
symptom deterioration with suspected intracranial hemorrhage occurs
during hospitalization, an immediate CT scan should be performed)

@ mRS score

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

24

[PDF_PAGE 25]
3.6.6 Visit 5 (90 [#7] days)

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ mRS score

@ Assessment of functional health status and quality of life using the EQ-
5D-5L

@ Barthel index (BI)

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.7 Endpoints of the Clinical Trial

3.7.1 Efficacy Endpoint

3.7.1.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint

Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90

(£7) days.

3.7.1.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Ordinal mRS score at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-2 at
90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) h, defined as >90%
reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP

@ Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT scan at 24 (-
2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)

@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) h, defined
as a NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop of 28 from baseline

@ NIHSS change from baseline at 7 (+2) days/discharge (whichever is
earlier)

3.7.2 Safety Endpoints

@ Proportion of patients with sICH within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification

e Proportion of patients with any intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) within 36h,
as defined by Heidelberg bleeding classification

25

[PDF_PAGE 26]
@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, as defined by The Global
Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for
Occluded Coronary Arteries (GUSTO): moderate and severe bleeding

@ Mortality at 90 (+7) days

4. Data Management

4.1 Data entry and Monitoring

Data entered manually will be collected via Electronic Data Capture (EDC)

through the use of eCRF. Sites will be responsible for data collection and data

entry into the EDC system. Sites will receive training and have access to a

manual for appropriate eCRF completion. In the event of discrepant data, the

sponsor or investigator will request data clarification from the sites, which the
sites will resolve electronically in the EDC system. When correcting the data,
correction track, reasons for correction and the signature of investigator will
be maintained in the EDC system's audit trail. The sponsor staff or designated
third party should determine the extent of data monitoring within the context of

GCP. The sponsor or its designated representatives will confirm the queries

they have raised according to the clarification from the sites and they may

send a query again, if necessary, until all queries are resolved.

4.2 Data Quality Assurance

Before data verification, a detailed data verification plan (DVP) will be

developed to clarify the content, mode and requirements of data verification.

The data management plan (DMP) will be developed by data manager

according to the protocol, and the data management tasks of clinical trial will

be specified and recorded in detail and comprehensively.

4.3 Database Lock

The database can be locked only if these conditions are met:

@ All data have been collected, processed and stored;

@ All diagnosis codes have been checked and confirmed;

@ All queries have been resolved;

26

[PDF_PAGE 27]
@ Quality control tests of data have passed;
@ All source data have been verified and reviewed;
@ Consistency check from third-party data has been completed;
@ Consistency check of SAE has been completed;
@ Signatures of all investigators have been obtained;
@ Data possible to analyze have been defined;
@ The statistical analysis plan has been proved.
5. Statistical Considerations and Analysis Plan
5.1 Sample Size
The primary outcome in this study is the proportion of patients with mRS 0-1
at 90 (+7) days. The sample size is based on the primary outcome.
Based on the reported pooled data [15] of the stroke thrombolysis trials in the
extended time window, we expect a 12% absolute difference in the proportion
of patients reaching the primary outcome between patients treated with
rhTNK-tPA and standard medical treatment (expected rate of excellent
functional outcome 50% in patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and 38% in
patients treated with standard medical treatment). Considering the potential
impact of the one interim efficacy analysis on the probability of type | error, we
adjusted the statistical significance to a two-sided alpha of 0.049. The total
sample size of 568 (n=284 per treatment group) will yield 80% power to detect
the specified difference at the two-sided 0.049 significance level, with a 5%
dropout rate.
One efficacy interim analysis will be taken place when 50% of the target
sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow-up. A Lan-DeMets
alpha spending function will be used to control the overall alpha level, using
O’Brien and Fleming boundaries (corresponding to alpha level of 0.003 and
0.049 at the interim and final analysis, respectively). This estimation was
performed based on PASS (NCSS, LLC.) version 15.0.

27

[PDF_PAGE 28]
5.2 Analysis Population
Full analysis set (FAS): According to principles of the intention-to-treat (ITT),
all patients who were randomized, received at least one-day treatment of
study drugs, had baseline important data, and had at least one assessment of
the primary efficacy evaluation are included in the full analysis set, even if the
patient did not receive the correct treatment, or did not follow the protocol until
completion. The full analysis set will be the primary analysis population for the
efficacy endpoints and subjects will be analyzed according to the treatment
group to which they were assigned at randomization.
Per protocol set (PPS): It is defined as the subset of the FAS excluding major
protocol violators deemed to have the potential to affect patient outcome in
terms of efficacy. Major protocol violations or deviations will be identified in a
blinded fashion prior to database lock. Analysis will also be repeated
according to the PPS.
Safety analysis set (SS): The Safety Population includes all patients who
received treatment with at least one evaluation of the safety outcome. In case
of violation of the randomization scheme, patients will be classified according
to the treatment they actually received.
5.3 Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses will be performed using SAS Software version 9.4
(SAS Institute Inc) and R version 4.4.1 and will be performed upon a
predetermined statistical analysis plan (SAP).
5.3.1 General Principles
Demographic, baseline characteristics, and efficacy analyses will be based on
FAS. Safety analyses will be based on safety population. Data were
summarized by means and standard deviations, or medians (interquartile
ranges) for continuous variables, and frequency along with percentage for
categorical variables.

28

[PDF_PAGE 29]
5.3.2 Summaries of Conduct of Study
Summaries the number of patients assessed, randomized, treated and
completed study in each study center, and the reasons for premature study
discontinuation.
5.3.3 Summaries of Demographic and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and baseline characteristics, such as age, sex, medical history
(hypertension, diabetes), and baseline stroke characteristics (such as
baseline NIHSS, trial of ORG 10172 in acute stroke treatment (TOAST) type),
will be summarized for all randomized patients using descriptive statistics.
Summaries will be presented overall and by treatment group.
5.3.4 Compliance to Treatment
Information about study medication used, reasons for discontinuation of study
medication, any drug prohibited were used, and concomitant medication
should be recorded. Summaries will be presented overall and by treatment
group.
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy Endpoint
The primary hypothesis will test the superiority of the proportion of patients
with mRS 0-1 at 90 days in the treatment group compared to control group,
with the null and alternative hypotheses as follows:
Ho: Prntnk-tPa- Peontrol <A versus H1: Prhtnk-tPa - Peontro!) >A
Where Risk ratio is the ratio of the proportion of patients with mRS 0-1 at 90
days between treatment and control groups, with a superiority margin of 0. If
the lower limit of 95% confidence interval bound exceeds margin, indicating
that the treatment group is superior to the control group. The generalized
linear model was used to compare the proportion of patients with score of 0-1
on the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the treatment and control
groups. We will also perform adjusted analysis of the primary outcome with
adjustment for pre-specified covariates.
5.3.6 Secondary Efficacy Endpoints

29

[PDF_PAGE 30]
For the analysis of ordinal mRS at 90 (+7) days, an ordinal logistic regression
model with treatment as the study variable will be used to calculate the
common odds ratio and corresponding 95% Cl between two treatment
groups. Prior to its application, the proportional odds assumption will be
tested. If the P-value for the overall score test of the proportional odds
hypothesis is >0.05, the proportional odds assumption will be deemed
acceptable. If the proportional odds hypothesis is rejected, the generalized
odds ratio (GenOR) with 95%CI will be calculated.
For the analysis of the following binary secondary efficacy endpoints,
generalized linear model will be employed to determine RR and its 95% Cl:
@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an MRS of 0-2 at
90 (+7) days
@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) hours, defined
as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP.
@ Proportion of early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) hours, defined as a
NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop of 28 from baseline
For the analysis of the following continuous secondary endpoints, linear
regression models will be employed:
@ Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT scan at 24 (-
2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)
@ NIHSS change from baseline to 7 (+2) days/discharge (whichever is
earlier)
Additional details of the hierarchical testing of the secondary endpoints will be
provided in the SAP.
5.3.7 Missing Data Processing
Every effort should be made to minimize missing data. Imputation of missing
values only be applied to the primary efficacy analysis in the Full Analysis Set
(FAS).
Missing primary efficacy outcome values will be replaced using mixed
30

[PDF_PAGE 31]
imputation technics:

« Ifthe patient discontinued treatment early due to a negative event (e.g.,
adverse event, disease progression, or death), their 90-day MRS score
will be imputed as >1.

«Ifthe patient completed treatment but withdrew from follow-up
early due to a negative event (e.g., adverse event or death), their 90-
day mRS score will also be imputed as >1.

« For all other cases, the last available post-treatment mRS score will be
used to classify the missing 90-day mRS score as $1 or >1.

To comprehensively assess the potential impact of missing data on efficacy
evaluation, additional sensitivity analyses using alternative imputation
methods may be conducted if deemed necessary. Further details will be
specified in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).
5.3.8 Safety Analyses
Safety analyses will be performed on safety population. The safety evaluation
data include adverse events observed during the trial and changes in physical
examination, vial sign, electrocardiogram, imaging examination and laboratory
data before and after treatment. Adverse events will be summarized using
descriptive statistics. Chi-square test or Fisher exact test will be used to
compared the difference in the safety endpoints between the two treatment
arms. Descriptive statistics will be performed on laboratory safety indicators.
Safety endpoints, including proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours,
proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, and mortality at 90 (+7) days,
will be compared using the log-binomial regression.
5.3.9 Subgroup Analysis
Subgroup analyses will be performed on a few important patient
characteristics and other variables of interest. The predefined subgroups
including:
@ Age (<65 years and 2 65 years);

31

[PDF_PAGE 32]
@ Time from symptom onset (last-seen-well) to randomization (4.5-9 hours,
9-24 hours and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and = 16);

@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);

@ Medium vessel occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA-M4 segment of MCA,
ACA, and PCA);

@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and 2100 mg/dL);

@ Baseline systolic blood pressure (140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).

6. Assessment of Safety

6.1 Definitions of AE and SAE

The definition of AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject

administered an investigational product. It can be a disease, worsening of

symptoms or signs, aggravation of concomitant diseases, effects of the

control drugs, which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the

investigational product. According to the criteria of causality between drugs

and AEs, the correlation between AEs and application of the investigational

product is divided into 5 grades: definitely related, probably related, possibly

related, unlikely related, and definitely not related. An SAE is an untoward

medical occurrence (whether considered to be related to investigational

product or not) that is fatal or life-threatening, requires or prolongs

hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity,

constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect, requires intervention to

prevent permanent impairment or damage or is an important medical event.

6.1.1 Examples of an AE

@ Abnormal laboratory values (e.g. hematology, biochemistry, or urinalysis)
or other clinical tests (e.g. ECG, radiology, vital signs). Including
deteriorations from baseline and those medically significant in the opinion
of investigators (unrelated to the progression of concomitant disease). If
an abnormal laboratory value is a manifestation of one specific disease or

32

[PDF_PAGE 33]
syndrome, the diagnosis should be recorded in the AE eCRF. If abnormal
laboratory findings are related to the same cause, these findings should
not be recorded repeatedly. The initial severity of the event should be
recorded, and the severity should be updated if the condition worsens.
Generally, abnormal laboratory values and clinical tests include:

- Presence of concurrent signs or symptoms, or

- Requiring active medical intervention, or

- Resulting in treatment interruption or discontinuation, or

- Requiring close monitoring, more frequent follow-up, or further clinical
evaluations.

@ Exacerbation of a chronic or intermittent of pre-existing condition,
including increased attack frequency and /or severity

@ New conditions detected or diagnosed after investigational product
administration even though it may have been present prior to the start of
the study

@ Any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom, or disease suspected to
indicate drug-drug interactions

6.1.2 Events not Meeting the AE Definition

@ = Any clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings or other abnormal
safety assessments which are associated with the underlying disease

@ Medical or surgical procedures (e.g., endoscopy, appendectomy); the
medical condition leading to the procedure is an AE

@ Hospitalization for social or convenience reasons not for medical reasons

@ Pre-existing condition, anticipated day-to-day fluctuations of pre-existing
conditions

@ Pre-existing condition, sign or symptom not related to the study treatment
prior to the first administration of investigational product

6.1.3 Examples of an SAE

@ Results in death

33

[PDF_PAGE 34]
All death during this study must be reported as SAE.

@ = |s life threatening

Note: The term “life-threatening” in the definition of “serious” refers to an event
in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not
refer to an event, which hypothetically might have caused death if it were
more severe.

@ Requires hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization
Note: In general, hospitalization signifies that the subject has been detained
(usually involving at least an overnight stay) at the hospital or emergency
ward for observation and/or treatment that would not have been appropriate in
the physician’s office or out-patient setting. Complications that occur during
hospitalization are AEs. If a complication prolongs hospitalization or fulfils any
other serious criteria, the event is serious. When in doubt as to whether
‘hospitalization’ occurred or was necessary, the AE should be considered
serious. Hospitalization for elective treatment of a pre-existing condition that
did not worsen from baseline is not considered as an AE.

@ Results in disability/incapacity

Note: The term disability means a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to
conduct normal life functions. This definition is not intended to include
experiences of relatively minor medical significance such as uncomplicated
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, and accidental trauma (e.g.
sprained ankle) which may interfere or prevent everyday life functions, but do
not constitute a substantial disruption.

@ Is acongenital abnormality/birth defect or

@ |sa significant medical event

Note: Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding
whether reporting is appropriate in other situations, such as important medical
events that may not be immediately life-threatening or result in death or
hospitalization, but may jeopardize the subject or may require medical or
surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the above

[PDF_PAGE 35]
definition. These should also be considered serious. Examples of such events
are invasive or malignant cancers, intensive treatment in an emergency room
or at home for allergic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do
not result in hospitalization, or development of drug dependency or abuse.
If uncertainty exists in determining whether an event qualifies as an SAE, the
investigator should discuss with the sponsor and ethics committee.
6.1.4 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR)
SUSAR is an unexpected SAE of which the nature or severity is not
consistent with the reference documents, including investigator's brochure
(IB), or the summary of product characteristics for an authorized medicinal
product.
6.2 AE and SAE Reporting Period
After randomization, all AEs/SAEs will be reported until 90 (+7) days.
Investigators are not required to collect AEs/SAEs after study completion. The
sponsor should be notified if the investigator becomes aware of any SAE that
occurs after the end of the AE reporting period, if the event is believed to be
related to prior study drug treatment.
6.3 Follow-up of AE/SAE
After initial report of AE/SAE, the investigator should follow each event during
subsequent visits to gather additional information. All SAEs, as well as AEs
deemed related to the study drug or leading to discontinuation of treatment,
should be followed until the event has resolved to baseline grade or better,
the event is assessed as stable by the investigator, the patient is lost to
follow-up, or death occurs. The investigators are responsible for conducting
follow-up visits medically necessary or in accordance with the sponsor to
clarify the causality of AEs/SAEs.
Follow-up information of AEs should be updated on the AE eCRF, printed and
re-signed by the investigator. Alternatively, updated information may be
documented directly on the original paper CRF with a renewed signature and
35

[PDF_PAGE 36]
date. Any modifications should be made by crossing out the original record
with double lines, annotating the changes, and signing/dating alongside. The
timelines and procedures for SAE follow-up reports align with those of the
initial report.

6.4 Recording and Severity Categorization of AE and SAE

6.4.1 Recording of AE/SAE

When an AE/SAE occurs, it is the responsibility of the investigator to review
all documentation (e.g. hospital progress notes, laboratory, and diagnostic
reports) relative to the event. The investigator will then record all relevant
information regarding an AE/SAE into the eCRF. The investigator will attempt
to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, symptoms, and/or other
clinical information. In the absence of a diagnosis, the individual
signs/symptoms should be documented.

For each AE/SAE, the following information should be recorded: the term,
start and stop dates, outcome, severity, concurrent medical conditions,
concomitant medications, description, causality assessment, actinons taken
due to AE.

6.4.2 Severity Categorization

The severity of AEs is evaluated based on Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0 by the National Cancer Institute (NCI),
in conjunction with a comprehensive assessment of the patient's clinical
condition. If an AE is not listed in the NCI-CTCAE, the following criteria should
be applied to grade its severity:

Grade 1 (Mild) Asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or
diagnostic observations only; intervention not
indicated.

Grade 2 (Moderate) | Minimal, local, or noninvasive intervention indicated;
limiting age-appropriate instrumental activities of
daily living (e.g. preparing meals, shopping, using the

36

[PDF_PAGE 37]
es
Grade 3 (Severe) Medically significant but not immediately life-
threatening; hospitalization or prolongation of
hospitalization indicated; limiting self-care activities of
daily living (e.g. bathing, dressing, feeding).
Grade 4 (Life- Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention
threatening) indicated.
6.4.3 Assessment of Causality of AE and SAE
Causality assessment is one of the criteria for regulatory reporting
requirements. Investigators are responsible for evaluating whether an AE is
considered to be related to the study drug. The following guidance should be
taken into consideration after reviewing IB or product information:
@ Temporal relationship of event onset to the initiation of study drug
@ Course of the event, with special consideration of the effect of dose
reduction, discontinuation of study drug, or reintroduction of study drug
@ Relationship to symptoms and signs and mechanism of action or
metabolic components of the study drug
@ Relationship of symptoms/signs alleviation or improvement to dose
reduction, without other targeted interventions for the AE
@ Relationship of symptoms/signs recurring or worsening to re-
administration of the study drug
@ Relationship of event occurrence to the concomitant conditions,
medications or other etiologies
@ Laboratory findings or clinical tests supporting a causal relationship
@ Known association in domestic or international literature
According to the criteria of causality, the correlation between AEs and the
application of study drug is divided into five grades: definitely related, probably
related, possibly related, unlikely related, and definitely not related.
37

[PDF_PAGE 38]
The investigators are responsible to document, review, provide a causality
assessment (even with limited information at the time of SAE reporting), and
update information based on follow-up.
When further evaluating the criteria for a SUSAR, those with a causality
assessment of “unlikely related” shall be classified as “unrelated” in the binary
classification system.
6.5 Reporting Requirements of SAE
While SAEs are recorded in the eCRF, special reporting requirements apply
for the reporting of SAEs. The investigator shall notify within 24 hours the
sponsor of any SAE that occurs in a subject at a trial site. The investigator
shall properly retain written confirmation of the submission of all SAE reports
as evidence that each SAE has been appropriately reported.
The sponsor will comply with the requirements for post-marketing investigator-
initiated interventional studies and report safety information related to study
drug to the regulatory authorities, the Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC), the
Clinical trial site, and the investigators involved in this study. The investigator
will review the Investigator Safety Reports received from the sponsor, which
describe SUSARs or other specific safety information, and then file them
together with the IB and notify the Ethics Committee. The sponsor will
promptly investigate any SAEs that occur in collaboration with the investigator
and take necessary measures to ensure the safety and rights of the
participants.
6.6 Reporting SAE to the Sponsor
Once an investigator becomes aware that an SAE has occurred, he/she will
immediately notify the sponsor within 24 hours. Any additional information
known after the event has been initially reported should be updated within 24
hours.
The investigator must complete, sign and date the SAE Form and verify the
accuracy of the information recorded on the form with the corresponding

38

[PDF_PAGE 39]
source documents. A scanned copy of SAE Form will be sent to the sponsor
within 24 hours.
6.7 Management of Patients Who Experience AE
1) Contingency plan for bleeding events
To prevent bleeding events, patients should be enrolled in strict evaluation
with the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study protocol, to exclude
subjects with potentially high risk of bleeding. During intravenous
thrombolysis, close attention should be paid to the patient’s changes of
symptoms and signs in order to detect bleeding events in time. The
management of bleeding events should follow the clinical routine of the
hospital and be based on the clinical judgement, which may refer to the
following measures:
() If the patient has neurological symptoms and/or abnormal signs within 24
hours after the start of treatment, intracranial hemorrhage should be
suspected, and the thrombolytic, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant drugs being
used should discontinued, and imaging examination should be performed
immediately to confirm the site of bleeding.
@) If intracranial hemorrhage or other clinically evident hemorrhage (e.g.
hematemesis, melena, hemoptysis) is confirmed, it is recommended to take
the following measures:
- Discontinue thrombolysis, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant medications
completely.
- Consult relevant specialists to jointly determine the appropriate treatment
plan.
- Monitor vital signs closely and manage related complications promptly.
- Transfuse fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate as needed.
- Antifibrinolytic drugs such as aminocaproic acid may be administered
within 24 hours after thrombolysis to counteract its effects.
- Blood transfusion may be necessary to correct hemodynamic
39

[PDF_PAGE 40]
abnormalities (hypotension) or anemia, with transfusion indications
determined based on clinical judgment. While carefully considering
transfusion indications, physicians should also pay attention to the adverse
effects of severe anemia on acute cerebral infarction.

- Assess the feasibility of surgical intervention if necessary.

@) Minor bleeding such as skin or mucous membrane bleeding, epistaxis,

gingival bleeding, microscopic hematuria, and positive fecal occult blood may

be treated symptomatically first. Whether to continue thrombolysis,
antiplatelet, and anticoagulant therapy or not will be decided according to the
severity of the bleeding.

2) Contingency plan for sICH

The incidence of sICH in our study is estimated 1-5%, and the vast majority of

sICH occurs within 24 hours after thrombolysis. It is characterized by sudden

changes in consciousness, single or multiple focal neurological deficits, coma,
headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, hypertensive emergencies, and rapid
death in some cases. Once it occurs, active measure should be taken:

- Discontinue thrombolysis, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant treatment
immediately.

- Perform imaging examinations (emergency CT or MRI) to determine the
location, extent, and type of intracranial hemorrhage.

- Measure hematocrit, hemoglobin, prothrombin time, activated partial
thromboplastin time, platelet count, fibrinogen, D-dimer, and perform blood
typing test and cross-matching.

- Reduce intracranial pressure, including appropriate blood pressure control,
elevating the head of the bed by 30 degrees, intravenous mannitol
infusion, endotracheal intubation, assisted ventilation, and, if necessary,
surgical hematoma evacuation, decompressive craniectomy, and
ventricular catheter drainage.

- Use reversal agents for thrombolysis, antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents
if necessary: administer 2 units of fresh frozen plasma every 6 hours for 24

[PDF_PAGE 41]
hours, recommend using protamine sulfate to neutralize unfractionated
heparin (1 mg of protamine sulfate neutralizes 100 U of unfractionated
heparin) for patients who have received unfractionated heparin within the
last 4 hours, and transfuse 6-8 unites of platelets if bleeding time is
abnormal.
3) Allergic reactions
No allergic reactions have been seen in clinical trials of this product in patients
following its use. In the event of any allergic reaction, anti-allergic treatment
needs to be done.
4) Other adverse events
The relationship between other adverse events and rhTNK-tPA is not clear,
and most of them are potential co-morbidities. These should be analyzed by
the investigator according to the specific situation and treated symptomatically
according to the corresponding treatment guidelines or clinical routines.
7. Ethical Considerations
7.1 Informed Consent
The trial will not start in any site before written approval and authorization by
the respective Ethics Committee and Regulatory Authority. Any subsequent
protocol amendment will be submitted to the Ethics Committees for approval.
If deviations from or modifications to the study protocol are implemented
during the study to eliminate immediate risks to participants, they may be
enacted immediately but should be promptly reported to the Ethics
Committee.
Before recruitment and enrolment into the study, each prospective candidate
(or authorized representative where this is applicable) will be given a full
explanation of the nature, purpose, procedures, benefits, potential risks,
compensation for injury. The subjects or their representatives will be asked to
give consent to participate in the study by signing the informed consent form.
The consent forms shall be signed and dated by the appropriate parties. The
a

[PDF_PAGE 42]
informed consent forms should indicate the version and date. A copy of
signed informed consent shall be provided to the subject or their
representatives.
The informed consent process should uphold the dignity and autonomy of
participants at every stage, ensuring respect for their right to self-
determination. Neither the investigator nor the trial staff(s) should coerce, lure,
or unduly influence subject to participate or to continue participating in the
trial. Participants are allowed to withdraw from the study at any time
unconditionally. The investigator will introduce the study drug to the subjects,
as well as the procedures; all relevant events will be reported to the
participants so that they can decide whether to continue participating.
7.2 Benefits and Risks of the Study
7.2.1 Potential Benefit and Risk in Interventional Arm
Previous meta-analyses and systematic reviews have found that for acute
non-LVO ischemic stroke patients in extended time window with salvageable
brain tissue as identified by perfusion imaging, intravenous thrombolysis has
superior clinical efficacy compared to placebo, although there is a lack of data
assessing the risk of hemorrhage. Studies have shown that even if the
incidence of intracranial hemorrhage in the intravenous thrombolysis group is
higher than that in the placebo group, it does not alter the overall net benefit
of intravenous thrombolysis. Additionally, rhTNK-tPA has a half-life four times
longer than rt-PA, allowing for a single intravenous bolus administration.
Previous studies have indicated that rhnTNK-tPA has a tendency to improve
neurological outcomes compared to rt-PA. In summary, while individuals
cannot be guaranteed direct benefits from thrombolytic treatment by
participating in the study, the implementation may provide an opportunity for
patients with salvageable brain tissue but with an onset time of more than 4.5
hours to receive intravenous thrombolysis. This is conducive to enhancing
public awareness of reperfusion therapy and may benefit the general

42

[PDF_PAGE 43]
population in the future.
1.2.2 Potential Benefit and Risk in Control Arm
Participants assigned to the control arm will receive standard medical
treatment with antiplatelet therapy. Due to variations in follow-up strategies
across different hospitals in clinical practice, patients enrolled may undergo
follow-up imaging or neurological examinations (such as 24-hour perfusion
imaging, 90-day mRS score) more frequently compared to those not enrolled.
The risks associated with these imaging and neurological function tests are
negligible, and participants may potentially benefit from these additional
follow-ups or examinations.
7.2.3 Risk-benefit Ratio
The objective of the study is to test efficacy and safety of intravenous rhTNK-
tPA in patients presenting within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have
anon-LVO and evidence of salvageable tissue on their baseline CTP. Several
previous studies on perfusion imaging-guided intravenous thrombolysis
beyond 4.5 hours were prematurely terminated due to slow recruitment and
clinical guidelines updates. Although a meta-analysis suggests potential
benefits of intravenous thrombolysis, results across studies remain
inconsistent. Furthermore, prior research primarily compared intravenous
thrombolytic agents against placebo rather than using antiplatelet therapy as
an active control, leaving the comparative efficacy and safety of thrombolysis
versus antiplatelet treatment unresolved. Consequently, this study is critical to
delineate the efficacy and safety of rhTNK-tPA compared to antiplatelet
therapy in acute non-LVO stroke patients based on perfusion imaging within
4.5-24 hours of symptom onset. The results will widen the time window for
intravenous thrombolysis. A positive result from this trial would yield
substantial societal benefits, significantly outweighing the limited potential
risks in the study. Conversely, a negative result would spare this population
from ineffective interventions, conserving healthcare resources and averting
43

[PDF_PAGE 44]
unnecessary risks.
7.3 Confidentiality
Personal data will be processed solely for evaluating the efficacy, safety,
quality and usage of the study drugs. Adequate procedures will be
implemented to ensure data security and confidentiality in accordance with
the relevant national laws and legislation. Technical safeguards will be applied
to protect person-identifiable data against unauthorized disclosure, access,
accidental or unlawful destruction, unintended loss or alteration. The sponsor
\with access to data are obligated to maintain the confidentiality of patient
identities.
The sponsor guarantees that the personal data will:
- Be processed in accordance with laws;
- Be collected only for the study objectives specified in the protocol and not

further processed for other purposes;
- Be adequate, relevant, and not excessive to support the study objectives
- Be accurate and, where necessary, kept updated
Before collecting personal data, investigators will obtain consent from subjects
or their representatives for data processing, and direct access to original
medical records for related monitoring, auditing, ethics committee review, and
inspections.
Participants have the right to request access to their personal data held by the
investigator and to demand corrections to any inaccurate or incomplete
information. Reasonable actions will be taken, taking into account the nature
of the request, study conditions, and prevailing legal requirements.
7.4 Study Discontinuation or Withdraw Criteria
7.4.1 Discontinuation of Individual Patients
The treatment with the study drug should be terminated immediately in case
of any AE, abnormal laboratory findings, or other conditions that in the
investigators’ opinion, continuation of the study drug would be detrimental.

44

[PDF_PAGE 45]
7.4.2 Withdrawal Criteria of Individual Patients

@ Patients have the right to withdraw consent at any time for any reason.

@ Poor compliance or incomplete information on the clinical or imaging
assessment.

@ Patients meet the criteria for discontinuation of study drug administration.

@ Loss to follow-up if patients cannot be contacted after at least three
consecutive documented attempts.

Every effort will be made to reduce unnecessary participant withdrawal.

7.4.3 Study Discontinuation

The sponsor has the right to halt or terminate the study at single center or all

centers. Reasons for terminating the study may include, but are not limited to,

the following:

@ Severe safety events occur in this study.

@ The study drug demonstrates poor efficacy, lack of therapeutic effect, or
absence of clinical value.

@ Major errors are found in the protocol (including evaluation criteria,
operations) that make it difficult to evaluate the drug effect; or a well-
designed protocol is implemented with major deviations, making it difficult
to evaluate the drug effect.

@ The sponsor or regulatory authority decides to discontinue the study.

If the study is halted or terminated due to safety concerns, the sponsor should

notify all investigators immediately and report the reasons to regulatory

authorities. In accordance with local laws and regulations, the investigators
should promptly inform the IEC with a detailed explanation. The investigators
should notify participants and ensure their appropriate medical care and
follow-up visits.

The halted study may resume only after address the concerns related to

safety, protocol compliance, data quality, and upon obtaining approval from

the sponsor, Ethic Committees, and regulatory authorities.
45

[PDF_PAGE 46]
7.4.4 Management of Patients Discontinuation or Withdrawal

If a patient discontinues or withdraws, the reason(s) for

discontinuation/withdrawal must be documented in both the source medical

records and eCRF. If multiple reasons exist, the primary reason should be

specified. All unused study drugs should be accounted for and returned. In

cases of lost-to-follow-up, the investigator will make every effort to re-

establish contact with the patient (e.g., via telephone, email/mail, or contacting

relatives/friends based on registered information).

8. Study Management and Monitoring

8.1 Protocol Amendments

The protocol will not be modified by the investigator or the sponsor without

first obtaining the agreement of the other in writing. Any change agreed upon

will be recorded in writing, the written amendment will be signed by the

investigator, the signed amendment will be appended to this study. All

protocol amendments had to be published by the sponsor. Any protocol

amendments will be submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB)/ IEC

and to regulatory authorities in accordance with local regulatory requirements.

Approval must be obtained from the IRB/IEC and regulatory authorities before

implementation of any changes, except for changes necessary to eliminate an

immediate hazard to participants only.

8.2 Quality Control

8.2.1 Study Monitoring of the Sponsor

- Acomprehensive study quality management system shall be established to

comprehensively optimize the process management of the study, including

trial design, implementation, documentation, outcome evaluation, reporting,

and archival of records.

- Quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) methodologies shall be

tailored to align with the potential risk of the trial and the criticality of the data.

- Qualified investigational centers will be selected to conduct this study. The
46

[PDF_PAGE 47]
sponsor will collaborate with centers to initiate the study in accordance with
regulatory requirements, the approved protocol after receiving ethic
committee approval.
- A dedicated research and management team will be established to oversee
and supervise the study execution. Timely communication will be maintained.
During inspections by the drug regulatory authorities, representatives from
both the research and management teams shall be present.
- The study will be processed in accordance with the GCP, protocol, and
relevant national and international legislation.
- No alterations to trial data are permitted in any form.
- The sponsor will deploy Clinical Research Associates to each participating
center for regular site monitoring visits to verify proper collection of informed
consents, accessibility of source data, accuracy and completeness of eCRF,
accountability and dispensing of study drugs, occurrence and records of AEs.
- If necessary, the sponsor can appoint an independent auditor to further
ensure the quality.
8.2.2 Study Monitoring of the Sites
- Faculty and investigators should avoid actual or apparent conflicts of
interest.
- Before the initiation of the study, site investigators should receive training on
the trial protocol and gain a thorough understanding of its implementation as
well as the significance of all relevant endpoints.
- The principal investigator (PI) of each site is responsible for supervising the
staff to strictly implement the study.
- Clinical trials infrastructure should be developed in each study site providing
research support and management.
- All investigational site staff should have provided appropriate and current
evidence that they are qualified by education. The site Pls have sufficient time
to properly conduct and complete the trail within the specific period and

47

[PDF_PAGE 48]
ensure that the data generated are reliable. Where a satellite site requires the
service of a third-party provider, the consent of the sponsor should be
obtained.
- Site staff should describe how the study procedures will be undertaken face-
to-face to patients and monitor the patients’ medication adherence.
- Investigators should strictly follow the study protocol and procedures. The
study drugs are forbidden to use for non-experimental purpose. Study related
documentation including AEs/SAEs should be recorded and maintained.
- During the trial implementation, it is preferable for the same investigator to
evaluate all observation endpoints for the same patient to minimize subjective
bias.
- When an AE/SAE occurs, site staff should provide appropriate treatment to
protect the rights and welfare of subjects.
- The site Pls have ultimate responsibility for the content of the eCRF but may
delegate the task to suitably qualified individuals. The Pls should, however,
maintain oversight of the quality of the data provided to the sponsor.
- Site staff should take active measure to control the drop-out rate within an
acceptable range.
- The QC personnel conduct a thorough assessment of the site’s readiness
prior to study initiation. Through the implementation and upon the study
completion, QC personnel will perform systematic reviews of source
documentation and ensure its proper archiving. The QA personnel should
conduct independent audits of the trail process. In the event of non-
conformities, QA personnel should promptly notify the investigators, ensuring
timely corrections are implemented and verified for effectiveness, where
applicable.
8.2.3 Site Inspections
Site visits will be conducted by the sponsor or an authorized representative for
inspection of study data, patients’ medical records, and eCRFs. A written

48

[PDF_PAGE 49]
report must be prepared after each monitoring visit. Monitors shall promptly
follow up on any issues or questions identified during monitoring, assist
investigators in resolving them, and accurately document the resolution
process.
9. Organizational Structure
9.1 Trials Boards and Committees
9.1.1 Steering Committee
- Provide scientific and strategic guidance for the trial and assume full
responsibility for the design, execution, and publication of the trial.
- Ensure the quality of the research and its implementation and management.
- Approve the trial protocol and operational guidelines prior to the initiation of
the trial.
- Hold regular teleconferences or face-to-face meetings to discuss and report
on the progress of the trial.
- Describe the composition and responsibilities in the charter, with the final
form confirmed before the trial begins.
9.1.2 Executive Committee
The steering committee of this study will decide on the final protocol and
oversee the trial.
9.1.3 Data Safety and Monitoring Board
The DSMB will regularly monitor the safety of the trial and guarantee the
safety of patients at all stages of OPTION. The members of the DSMB are not
participants of the OPTION consortium and not involved in the clinical trial in
any other way. DSMB members will be qualified by DSMB and the steering
committee before the study initiation, including the certification, roles, and
responsibilities. A report will be submitted to the chief of the committee once a
DSMB meeting is finished. The DSMB may at any time recommend an
amendment to the clinical trial protocol or termination of the trial in case of
safety concerns.

49

[PDF_PAGE 50]
9.1.4 Clinical Events Committee
Safety endpoints and SAEs will be reviewed by Clinical Events Committee
(CEC). The charter of CEC will be approved by the committee and the
steering committee before the study initiation.
9.1.5 Imaging Core Laboratory
The objectives of the imaging core laboratory (ICL) are to provide an unbiased
assessment of several imaging measures. They are knowledgeable in the
analysis of neuroradiological images and will be blinded, i.e. unaware of the
patient's treatment allocation and trial outcome. The ICL will receive coded
imaging data only. ICL results will overrule site/investigator assessments
probably.
9.2 Site Training and Certification
The steering committee will provide training to participating sites in GCP and
in some outcome assessments (e.g., NIHSS, mRS, etc.). Prior to initiation of
enrollment, site Pls and coordinators must complete all training programs.
The training programs that need to be completed are as follows:
- Study procedures
- OPTION eligibility criteria
- mRS
- NIHSS
- GCS
- EQ-5D-5L
- CTPDoc (Shukun, Beijing, China) software
- TOAST classification
- Heidelberg bleeding classification
- Collecting DICOM imaging data
The training program must be completed before a site begins to initiate the
trial. Pl and key research members at each site will regularly participate in
teleconferences to address issues during the study.

50

[PDF_PAGE 51]
A detailed IB will serve as the primary document describing all study related
procedures. Members of steering committee and research coordinators will
maintain communication with site investigators via telephone, Wechat, or
email to resolve issues encountered during the study running.
The steering committee will manage and conduct site visits to ensure the
integrity and validity of the data in eCRF. During the trial, each site should be
visited at least once. If there are problems with data quality or recruitment,
sites should be visited as needed.
10. Study Report and Publications
10.1 Study Registration and Results
The trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/) before the
start and updated as appropriate according to the protocol amendments or
study progress. When the study is completed, the study representatives will
register the study result without delay.
10.2 Publication of Results
Upon study completion, the research database will be closed within one
month following the last scheduled follow-up date. Study representatives shall
implement necessary measures (e.g., preventing identification of individual
study patients) to protect human rights or the rights and interests of patients
and relevant parties. Manuscripts will be submitted to leading clinical journals
within three months after database closure.
The draft manuscript will be shared with the sponsor one month prior to
submission; however, the sponsor shall not influence its content. Authorship
will be determined by study representatives in accordance with the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE)
Recommendations for the Conduct, Reporting, Editing and Publication of
Scholarly Work in Medical Journals (http://www.icmje.orq). All authors must
review and approve the manuscript details prior to submission. This
authorship policy equally applies to conference presentations.

51

[PDF_PAGE 52]
11. Funding and Conflict of Interest
OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funders are Major Program of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (82090043); CSPC Recomgen
Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD. The investigators have no conflicts of
interest with the sponsor. No potential conflicts of interest that might influence
the study outcome or protocol development exist during study design,
conduct, statistical analysis, or reporting of the results.
12. References
1. Turc G, Bhogal P, Fischer U, et al. European Stroke Organisation (ESO)- European
Society for Minimally Invasive Neurological Therapy (ESMINT) guidelines on mechanical
thrombectomy in acute ischemic stroke. J Neurointerv Surg. Jun 2019;11(6):535-538.
doi:10.1136/neurintsurg-2018-014568
2. Smith EE, Kent DM, Bulsara KR, et al. Accuracy of Prediction Instruments for
Diagnosing Large Vessel Occlusion in Individuals With Suspected Stroke: A Systematic
Review for the 2018 Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients With Acute
Ischemic Stroke. Stroke. Mar 2018;49(3):e111-e122. doi:10.1161/str.0000000000000160
3. Nogueira RG, Jadhav AP, Haussen DC, et al. Thrombectomy 6 to 24 Hours after
Stroke with a Mismatch between Deficit and Infarct. N Engl J Med. Jan 4 2018;378(1):11-
21. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1706442
4. Albers GW, Marks MP, Kemp S, et al. Thrombectomy for Stroke at 6 to 16 Hours
with Selection by Perfusion Imaging. N Engl J Med. Feb 22 2018;378(8):708-718.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1713973
5. Powers WJ, Rabinstein AA, Ackerson T, et al. Guidelines for the Early
Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: 2019 Update to the 2018
Guidelines for the Early Management of Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Guideline for
Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. Dec 2019;50(12):e344-e418. doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000211
52

[PDF_PAGE 53]
6. Tao C, Nogueira RG, Zhu Y, et al. Trial of Endovascular Treatment of Acute
Basilar-Artery Occlusion. N Engl J Med. Oct 13 2022;387(15):1361-1372.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2206317
7. Jovin TG, LiC, Wu L, et al. Trial of Thrombectomy 6 to 24 Hours after Stroke Due
to Basilar-Artery Occlusion. N Engl J Med. Oct 13 2022;387(15):1373-1384.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2207576
8. Saver JL, Chapot R, Agid R, et al. Thrombectomy for Distal, Medium Vessel
Occlusions: A Consensus Statement on Present Knowledge and Promising Directions.
Stroke 2020;51(9):2872-2884. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.028956.
9. Berge E, Whiteley W, Audebert H, et al. European Stroke Organisation (ESO)
guidelines on intravenous thrombolysis for acute ischaemic stroke. Eur Stroke J. Mar
2021;6(1):I-LXII. doi:10.1177/2396987321989865
10. Khaja AM, Grotta JC. Established treatments for acute ischaemic stroke. Lancet.
Jan 27 2007;369(9558):319-30. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(07)60154-8
11. Darby DG, Barber PA, Gerraty RP, et al. Pathophysiological topography of acute
ischemia by combined diffusion-weighted and perfusion MRI. Stroke. Oct
1999;30(10):2043-52. doi:10.1161/01.str.30.10.2043
12. Markus R, Reutens DC, Kazui S, et al. Hypoxic tissue in ischaemic stroke:
persistence and clinical consequences of spontaneous survival. Brain. Jun 2004;127(Pt
6):1427-36. doi:10.1093/brain/awh162
13. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Parsons MW, et al. Association of Reperfusion After
Thrombolysis With Clinical Outcome Across the 4.5- to 9-Hours and Wake-up Stroke
Time Window: A Meta-Analysis of the EXTEND and EPITHET Randomized Clinical
Trials. JAMA Neurol. Feb 1 2021;78(2):236-240. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.4123
14. Tsivgoulis G, Katsanos AH, Malhotra K, et al. Thrombolysis for acute ischemic
stroke in the unwitnessed or extended therapeutic time window. Neurology. Mar 24
2020;94(12):e1241-e1248. doi:10.1212/wnl.0000000000008904
15. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Ringleb PA, et al. Extending thrombolysis to 4.5-9 h and
wake-up stroke using perfusion imaging: a systematic review and meta-analysis of

53

[PDF_PAGE 54]
individual patient data. Lancet. Jul 13 2019;394(10193):139-147. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(19)31053-0
16. Davis SM, Donnan GA, Parsons MW, et al. Effects of alteplase beyond 3 h after
stroke in the Echoplanar Imaging Thrombolytic Evaluation Trial (EPITHET): a placebo-
controlled randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. Apr 2008;7(4):299-309. doi:10.1016/S1474-
4422(08)70044-9
17. Ringleb P, Bendszus M, Bluhmki E, et al. Extending the time window for
intravenous thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke using magnetic resonance imaging-
based patient selection. Int J Stroke. Jul 2019;14(5):483-490.
doi:10.1177/1747493019840938
18. MaH, Campbell BCV, Parsons MW, et al. Thrombolysis Guided by Perfusion
Imaging up to 9 Hours after Onset of Stroke. N Engl J Med. May 9 2019;380(19):1795-
1803. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1813046
19. Kheiri B, Osman M, Abdalla A, et al. Tenecteplase versus alteplase for
management of acute ischemic stroke: a pairwise and network meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. J Thromb Thrombolysis. Nov 2018;46(4):440-450.
doi:10.1007/s11239-018-1721-3
20. Katsanos AH, Psychogios K, Turc G, et al. Off-Label Use of Tenecteplase for the
Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA
Netw Open. Mar 1 2022;5(3):e224506. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.4506
21. Katsanos AH, Safouris A, Sarraj A, et al. Intravenous Thrombolysis With
Tenecteplase in Patients With Large Vessel Occlusions: Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Stroke. Jan 2021;52(1):308-312. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.030220
22. Burgos AM, Saver JL. Evidence that Tenecteplase Is Noninferior to Alteplase for
Acute Ischemic Stroke: Meta-Analysis of 5 Randomized Trials. Stroke. Aug
2019;50(8):2156-2162. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.119.025080
23. Huang X, Maclsaac R, Thompson JL, et al. Tenecteplase versus alteplase in stroke
thrombolysis: An individual patient data meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int
J Stroke. Jul 2016;11(5):534-43. doi:10.1177/1747493016641112

54

[PDF_PAGE 55]
24. Chinese Society of Neurology, Chinese Stroke Society. Chinese guidelines for
diagnosis and treatment of acute ischemic stroke 2018. Chinese Journal of Neurology,
Sep 2018;51(9):666-682. doi: 10.3760/cma_j.issn.1006-7876.2018.09.004.
25. Chinese Society of Neurology, Chinese Stroke Society. Chinese guideline for the
secondary prevention of ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack 2022. Chinese
Journal of Neurology, Oct 2022;55(10):1071-1110.doi:10.3760/cma.j.cn113694-
20220714-00548

55

[PDF_PAGE 56]
Appendix 1: modified Rankin Scale
(Seore[Osscnpton
[o_[Nosymptoms ata
1 No significant disability despite symptoms; able to carry out all usual duties
and activities
2 Slight disability; unbale to carry out all previous activities; but able to look
after own affairs without assistance
3 Moderate disability; requiring some help, but able to walk without
assistance
4 Moderately severe disability; unbale to walk without assistance and unable
to attend to own bodily needs without assistance
5 Severe disability; bedridden, incontinent and requiring constant nursing
care and attention
Ce
The modified Rankin Scale is used to measure the neurological recovery of patients
after stroke. The official definitions of each category are shown below in bold and the
italicized text provides guidance that may reduce inter-observer variability, without
requiring a structured interview. Note that only symptoms arising since the stroke
should be considered. Walking counts as independent provided it is not assisted by
another person (walking aids such as a cane are allowed).
If there is still some doubt between two adjacent alternatives on the scale, and both
options appear equally valid, then the worse option should be chosen.
0 No symptoms at all
The patient should be unaware of any new limitation of symptoms caused by the
stroke, however minor.
1 No significant disability despite symptoms; able to carry out all usual duties
and activities
The patient has some symptoms as a result of the stroke, whether physical or
cognitive
— for example affecting speech, reading, or writing; or physical movement; or
sensation; or vision; or swallowing; or mood — but can continue to take part in all
previous work, social and leisure activities. The crucial question to distinguish grade 1
from grade 2 (below) may be, ‘Is there anything that you can no longer do that you
used to do until you had the stroke?’ As a guide, an activity that was undertaken more
frequently than monthly could be regarded as a ‘usual activity’.
2 Slight disability; unable to carry out all previous activities, but able to look
after own affairs without assistance
The patient will be unable to undertake some activities that were possible before the
stroke (e.g. driving a car, dancing, reading, or working) but is still able to look after
himself/herself without help from others on a day-to-day basis. Thus, the patient can
56

[PDF_PAGE 57]
manage dressing, moving around, feeding, toileting, preparing simple meals,
shopping, and traveling locally without needing assistance from anyone else.
Supervision is not necessary. This grade assumes that the patient could be left alone
at home for periods of a week or more without concern.
3 Moderate disability; requiring some help, but able to walk without assistance
At this grade, the patient is independently mobile (using a walking aid of frame if
necessary) and can manage dressing, toileting, feeding, etc. but needs help from
someone else for more complex tasks. For example, someone else may need to
undertake shopping, cooking, or cleaning and will need to visit the patient more often
than weekly to ensure that these activities are completed. The assistance can be
advisory rather than physical: for example, a patient who needs supervision or
encouragement to cope with financial affairs would be in this grade.
4 Moderately severe disability; unable to walk and attend to bodily needs
without assistance
The patient requires someone else to help with some daily tasks, whether walking,
dressing, toileting, or eating. This patient will be visited at least once and usually twice
or more times daily, or must live in proximity to a carer. To distinguish grade 4 from
grade 5 (below), consider whether the patient can regularly be left alone for moderate
periods during the day.
5 Severe disability; bedridden, incontinent, and requiring constant nursing care
and attention
Someone else will always need to be available during the day and at times during the
night, though not necessarily a trained nurse.
6 Dead

57

[PDF_PAGE 58]
Appendix 2: National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
Administer stroke scale items in the order listed. Record performance in each category
after each subscale exam. Do not go back and change scores. Follow directions provided
for each exam technique. Scores should reflect what the patient does, not what the
clinical thinks the patient can do. The clinician should record answers while administering
the exam and work quickly. Expect where indicated, the patients should not be coached
(i.e. repeated requests to patients to make a special effort).
1a Level of Consciousness: 0= Alert; keenly responsive.
The investigator must choose a response if a full 1= Not alert; but arousable by minor stimulation to
evaluation is prevented by such obstacles as an obey, answer, or respond.
endotracheal tube, language 2= Not alert; requires repeated stimulation to
barrier, orotracheal trauma/bandages. A 3 is scored attend, or is obtunded and requires strong or painful
only if the patient makes no movement (other than stimulation to make movements (not stereotyped).
reflexive posturing) in response to noxious stimulation. | 3= Responds only with reflex motor or autonomic
effects, or totally unresponsive, flaccid, and
areflexic.
1b LOC Questions: ([t is important that only the initial | 0= Answers both questions correctly.
answer be graded and that the examiner not “help” 1= Answers one question correctly.
the patient with verbal or non-verbal cues.) 2= Answers neither question correctly.
The patient is asked the month and his/her age. The
answer must be correct - there is no partial credit for
being close. Aphasic and stuporous patients who do
not comprehend the questions will score 2. Patients
unable to speak because of endotracheal intubation,
orotracheal trauma, severe dysarthria from any cause,
language barrier, or any other problem not secondary
to aphasia are given a 1.
2 Best Gaze: 0= Normal.
Only horizontal eye movements will be tested. 1= Partial gaze palsy; gaze is abnormal in
Voluntary or reflexive (oculocephalic) eye movements _| one or both eyes, but forced deviation or total gaze
will be scored, but caloric testing is not done. If the paresis is not present.
patient has a conjugate deviation of the eyes that can 2= Forced deviation, or total gaze paresis
be overcome by voluntary or reflexive activity, the is not overcome by the oculocephalic
score will be 1. If a patient has an isolated peripheral maneuver.
nerve
paresis (CN Ill, IV, or VI), score a 1. Gaze is testable in
all aphasic patients. Patients with ocular trauma,
bandages, pre-existing blindness, or other disorder of
visual acuity or fields should be tested with reflexive
58

[PDF_PAGE 59]
movements, and a choice made by the investigator.
Establishing eye contact and then moving about the
patient from side to side will occasionally clarify the
presence of a partial gaze palsy.
3 Visual: 0= No visual loss.
Visual fields (upper and lower quadrants) are tested by | 1= Partial hemianopia.
confrontation, using finger counting or visual threat, as | 2= Complete hemianopia.
appropriate. Patients may be encouraged, but if they 3= Bilateral hemianopia (blind including
look at the side of the moving fingers appropriately, cortical blindness).
this can be scored
as normal. If there is unilateral blindness or
enucleation, visual fields in the remaining eye are
scored. Score 1 only if a clear-cut asymmetry,
including quadrantanopia, is found. If patient is blind
from any cause, score 3. Double simultaneous.
stimulation is performed at this point. If there is
extinction, patient receives a 1, and the results are
used to respond to item 11.
4 Facial Palsy: O= Normal symmetrical movements.
Ask - or use pantomime to encourage - the patient to 1= Minor paralysis (flattened nasolabial
show teeth or raise eyebrows and close eyes. Score fold, asymmetry on smiling).
symmetry of grimace in response to noxious stimuli in 2= Partial paralysis (total or near-total
the poorly responsive or non-comprehending patient. If | paralysis of lower face).
facial trauma/bandages, orotracheal tube, tape, or 3= Complete paralysis of one or both
other physical barriers obscure the face, these should sides (absence of facial movement in the
be removed to the extent possible. upper and lower face).
5 Motor Arm: O= No drift; limb holds 90 (or 45) degrees for full 10
The limb is placed in the appropriate position: extend seconds.
the arms (palms down) 90 degrees (if sitting) or 45 1= Drift; limb holds 90 (or 45) degrees, but drifts
degrees (if supine). down before full 10 seconds; does not hit bed or
Drift is scored if the arm falls before 10 seconds. The other support.
aphasic patient is encouraged using urgency in the 2= Some effort against gravity; limb cannot get to or
voice and pantomime, but not noxious stimulation. maintain (if cued) 90 (or 45) degrees, drifts down to
Each limb is tested in turn, beginning with the non- bed, but has some effort against gravity.
paretic arm. Only in the case of amputation or joint 3= No effort against gravity; limb falls.
fusion at the shoulder, the examiner should record the | 4= No movement.
score as untestable (UN) and clearly write the 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
explanation for this choice. 5a Left Arm
5b Right Arm
6 Motor Leg: 0= No drift; leg holds 30-degree position
The limb is placed in the appropriate position: hold the | for full 5 seconds.
leg at 30 degrees (always tested 1= Drift; leg falls by the end of the 5-
supine). Drift is scored if the leg falls before 5 seconds. | second period but does not hit the bed.
The aphasic patient is encouraged using urgency in 2= Some effort against gravity; leg falls
59

[PDF_PAGE 60]
the voice and pantomime but not noxious stimulation. to bed by 5 seconds, but has some effort
Each limb is tested in turn, beginning with the non- against gravity.
paretic leg. Only in the case of amputation or joint 3= No effort against gravity; leg falls to
fusion at the hip, the examiner should record the score | bed immediately.
as untestable (UN), and clearly write the explanation 4= No movement.
for this choice. 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
6a Left Leg
6b Right Leg
7 Limb Ataxia: O= Absent.
This item is aimed at finding evidence of a unilateral 1= Present in one limb.
cerebellar lesion. Test with eyes open. In case of 2= Present in two limbs.
visual defect, ensure testing is done in intact visual 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
field. The finger-nose-finger and heel-shin tests are
performed on both sides, and ataxia is scored only if
present out of proportion to weakness. Ataxia is absent
in the patient who cannot understand or is paralyzed.
Only in the case of amputation or joint fusion, the
examiner should record the score as untestable (UN)
and clearly write the explanation for this choice. In
case of blindness, test by having the patient touch
nose from extended arm position.
8 Sensory: 1= Mild-to-moderate sensory loss; patient feels
Sensation or grimace to pinprick when tested, or pinprick is less sharp or is dull on the affected side;
withdrawal from noxious stimulus in the obtunded or or there is a loss of superficial pain with pinprick,
aphasic patient. Only sensory loss attributed to stroke but patient is aware of being touched.
is scored as abnormal and the examiner should test as | 2= Severe or total sensory loss; patient is not aware
many body areas [arms (not hands), legs, trunk, face] of being touched in the face, arm, and leg.
as needed to accurately check for hemisensory loss. A
score of 2, “severe or total sensory loss,” should only
be given when a severe or total loss of sensation can
be clearly demonstrated. Stuporous and aphasic
patients will, therefore, probably score 1 or 0. The
patient with brainstem stroke who has bilateral loss of
sensation is scored 2. If the patient does not respond
and is quadriplegic, score 2. Patients in a coma (item
1a = 3) are automatically given a 2 on this item.
9 Best Language: 0= No aphasia; normal.
A great deal of information about comprehension will 1= Mild-to-moderate aphasia; some obvious loss of
be obtained during the preceding sections of the fluency or facility of comprehension, without
examination. For this scale item, the patient is asked to | significant limitation on ideas expressed or form of
describe what is happening in the attached picture, to expression. Reduction of speech and/or
name the items on the attached naming sheet, and to comprehension, however, makes conversation
read from the attached list of sentences. about provided materials difficult or impossible. For
Comprehension is judged from responses here, as well | example, in conversation about provided materials,
60

[PDF_PAGE 61]
as to all of the commands in the preceding general examiner can identify picture or naming card

neurological exam. If visual loss interferes with the content from patient's response.

tests, ask the patient to identify objects placed in the 2= Severe aphasia; all communication is through

hand, repeat, and produce speech. The intubated fragmentary expression; great need for inference,

patient should be asked to write. questioning, and guessing by the listener. Range of

The patient in a coma (item 1a =3) will automatically information that can be exchanged is limited;

score 3 on this item. The examiner must choose a listener carries burden of communication. Examiner

score for the patient with stupor or limited cooperation, | cannot identify materials provided from patient

but a score of 3 should be used only if the patient is response.

mute and follows no one-step commands. 3=Mute, global aphasia; no usable speech or
auditory comprehension.

10 Dysarthria: O= Normal.

If patient is thought to be normal, an adequate sample | 1= Mild-to-moderate dysarthria; patient

of speech must be obtained by asking patient to read slurs at least some words and, at worst,

or repeat words from the attached list. If the patient can be understood with some difficulty.

has severe aphasia, the clarity of articulation of 2= Severe dysarthria; patient’s speech is

spontaneous speech can be rated. Only if the patient is | so slurred as to be unintelligible in the

intubated or has other physical barriers to producing absence of or out of proportion to any

speech, the examiner should record the score as dysphasia, or is mute/anarthric.

untestable (UN), and clearly write the explanation for 9= UN=Intubated or other physical

this choice. Do not tell the patient why he/she is being | barrier.

tested.

11 Extinction and Inattention (formerly Neglect): O= No abnormality.

Sufficient information to identify neglect may be 1= Visual, tactile, auditory, spatial, or

obtained during the prior testing. If the patient has a personal inattention, or extinction to

severe visual loss preventing visual double bilateral simultaneous stimulation in one

simultaneous stimulation, and the cutaneous stimuli of the sensory modalities.

are normal, the score is normal. If the patient has 2= Profound hemi-inattention or

aphasia but does appear to attend to both sides, the extinction to more than one modality;

score is normal. The presence of visual spatial neglect | does not recognize own hand or orients to

or anosagnosia may also be taken as evidence of only one side of space.

abnormality. Since the abnormality is scored only if

present, the item is never untestable.

ee

61

[PDF_PAGE 62]
LIL
ost le i
a 85 MS ASN
\7 aay :
Or a
N | 7 = V
Wee SE
NL NK SG
I7-) if
Aw sah
Please read the following words:
I know.
Go down the stairs.
Go back home and cook dinner.
Review at school.
Give an excellent speech.
62

[PDF_PAGE 63]
tie
Te
NW ew
» MY C <a
\ TAY }
ies l
K oF
‘yy 46s
Ze ji
1 . iy
\"
ay | Vas, Vin wll ) han,
Please read the following words:
Mom
Earth
Airplane Airplane
Silk
Start on time
Eat the grape and don’t spit grape skins
63

[PDF_PAGE 64]
Appendix 3: Glasgow Coma Scale
Assessment Measure Score
Eye opening (E) 4= Spontaneous
3= To sound
2= To pain
1= Never
Verbal response (V) 5= Oriented
4= Confused conversation
3= Inappropriate words
2= Incomprehensible sounds
1= None
Motor response (M) 6= Obeys command
5= Localises pain
4= Withdrawal flexion
3= Abnormal flexion
2= Extension
1= None
TOTAL seve lS.
(E+M+V)
NB. If the patient is intubated the verbal response should be scored 1.
When scoring the motor response, assess the response for the extremities of side
unaffected by partial or complete paralysis.
64

[PDF_PAGE 65]
Appendix 4: EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire
Under each heading, please tick the ONE box that best describes your health TODAY.
MOBILITY
[Thave no probiensinwakingabowt ———SSCSCSCS~S~S~S~
[Ihave moderate problemsin waking about ———SSCSC~C~S~S~sCC
[Thave severe problemsin waking about ———~—SCSCSCS~S~
SELF-CARE
[have no probems washing ordressing mysa’ ————SSCSCS~S~—*d
[Thave sight problems washing or dressing nyse’ ———SSCSCSCSC*~
[Thave moderate problems washing or dessing nyse ————SSSSCd id
[Ihave severe problems washing or dressing nyse ————SSSC*dE =
[Tamunabietowashordressmyse SSS
USUAL ACTIVITIES (e.g. work, study, house work, family or leisure activities)
[Ihave no problems ding ny usvalacivtes Ed
[Thave sight problems doing my wsualacivies————SSCSCSCSCS~d
[Thave moderate problems doing my wsualaciviles—————SSSSS«d id
[Ihave severe problems doing my usualacives———SSCS~*~d=d
[Tam unabietodomyusualacivies————SSSSCSCS~
PAIN/DISCOMFORT
A
[Ihave sight painordscomfoR ———=SCSCSCSC~“~“~*~“~“~*~*~*~rSCSC*d
[Ihave moderate painordsconfor——=~SCSCSC~C~S~S
[Ihave severe pain ordscomfon SSS
[Ihave extemepainordscomfok——=SCSCSC~C~“~“~*~“~*~*~rSSC*d
ANXIETY/DEPRESSION
[1amnotanxious ordepressed
[am sighty enous ordepressed SSCS
[Tam moderately anious ordepressed ——=SCSCSC~*~*~“~*~*~“~*~*~wSCSC*d
[1am severe anvous ordepressed ——SSSSSCSC~S~S~S id
a
65

[PDF_PAGE 66]
@ We would like to know how good or bad your health is TODAY
@ = This scale is numbered from 0 to 100.
@ 100 means the best health you can imagine.
O means the worst health you can imagine.
@ = Mark an X on the scale to indicate how your health is TODAY.
@ Now, please write the number you marked on the scale in the box below.
‘The best health
you can imagine
100
95
90
85
80
5
70
65
60
5S
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
5
10
5
o
you can mopne
YOUR HEALTH TODAY=
66

[PDF_PAGE 67]
Clinical Study Protocol
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel
Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective,
Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
if
OrTi@N
Protocol Number: XMEC-2023-002
Coordinating Center: Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University
Principal Investigator: Junwei Hao
Co-Principal Investigator: Qingfeng Ma
Department: Department of Neurology
Nature of the study: Investigator Initiated Trial
Funding: Beijing Hospitals Authority Clinical Medicine Development of special
funding support (ZLRK202514); CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical
(Guangzhou) Co., LTD.
Protocol Version: Final protocol, Version 1.6, June 20, 2025
1

[PDF_PAGE 68]
Signature Page for Sponsors
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type
Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in
Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-
label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
The content and implementation of this protocol comply with the principles of
the "Declaration of Helsinki" and relevant ethical requirements, strictly
adhering to the provisions of "Good Clinical Practice (GCP)". The rights and
safety of patients are prioritized as the primary consideration, while ensuring
the authenticity and reliability of clinical trial results.
The Sponsor will establish, implement, and promptly update standard
operating procedures for the quality assurance and quality control systems in
accordance with GCP requirements. The entire process of clinical trials and
laboratory testing will follow quality management standard operating
procedures. Data managing will undergo quality control to verify the reliability
of all data and the accuracy of data processing.
The Sponsor guarantees the engagement of qualified biostatisticians, clinical
pharmacologists, and physicians to participate in the trial, including protocol
and case report form designing, trial implementation supervision, data
processing and verification, statistical analysis plan development, as well as
preparation of interim and final clinical study reports. Any issues identified
during the trial that may affect patient safety, implementation, or alter ethical
committee approval decisions will be promptly communicated to investigators,
trial institutions, and drug regulatory authorities.
Sponsor: Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University
Version: V1.6 Date: June 20, 2025
Signature:
Date:

2

[PDF_PAGE 69]
Signature Page for Site Researchers
Title: Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type
Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in
Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-
label, Blinded Endpoint Trial (OPTION)
We have reviewed this protocol and agree to its contents. | will conduct and
supervise this trial in strict accordance with the protocol. As a Principal
Investigator (PI), | will provide copies of this protocol and all related
documentation to all participating researchers. | will discuss these materials
with them to ensure that all personnel involving in the trial at our site fully
understand their responsibilities.
During the implementation, | will comply with all laws and regulations
governing clinical research and adhere to the provisions of this protocol and
GCP. Protecting patients' rights and welfare will remain paramount.
| will compliance with all requirements for ethical review and approval by the
Ethics Committee.
| will maintain complete and accurate medical records, ensuring they are
available for audit and inspection as required by relevant regulations.
| agree to promptly report to the Ethics Committee any modifications to trial
activities, as well as any unexpected issues involving risks to patients or
others. Furthermore, | will not implement any protocol amendments prior to
Ethics Committee approval, except when urgent modifications are necessary
to mitigate immediate risks to patient safety.
Version: V1.6 Date: June 20, 2025
Signature:
Date:

3

[PDF_PAGE 70]
Protocol Synopsis

Study Title Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large
Vessel Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter,
Prospective, Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial

Funding Beijing Hospitals Authority Clinical Medicine Development of
special funding support (ZLRK202514); CSPC Recomgen
Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD.

Objective To evaluate whether treatment with rhTNK-tPA, administered
between 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset can improve
neurological outcome in patients who have a non-large vessel
occlusion screened by perfusion imaging

Study Design A multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-

eee [ismiscser ene

Inclusion Criteria Clinical Inclusion Criteria
@ = Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
e@ Age 218 years
@ = Pre-stroke modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score 0-1
@ Disabling stroke defined as follows:

Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score

6-25 at the time of randomization, Or NIHSS 4-5 with disabling

deficit (e.g. hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand function) as

determined by the managing clinician

@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h of treatment initiation (onset
time refers to “last-seen-well”)

@ Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible
representatives

Imaging inclusion criteria

e@ = Target mismatch profile on computed tomography perfusion
(CTP) defined as an ischemic core volume (using regional
cerebral blood flow (rCBF)<30% on CTP) <50mL, a
mismatch ratio (time-to-maximum (Tmax)>6 sec volume to
ischemic core ratio) 21.2, and a mismatch volume (Tmax>6
sec volume- ischemic core volume) 210mL

Exclusion Criteria Clinical exclusion criteria
@ = Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or

intention to receive intravenous thrombolysis
@ = Contraindication to thrombolysis
@ Planned or anticipated treatment with endovascular therapy
4

[PDF_PAGE 71]
@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if in the judgement
of the managing clinician is likely to result in a NIHSS <4 at
randomization

@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in women of
childbearing potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ = Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation
factor deficiency

@ = Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or
anticoagulant use. If on warfarin, international normalized
ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin time >15s; if use of any
direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if use of
heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ = Use of glycoprotein IIb-IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/yL

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known
severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate
<30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ = Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

e@ Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last 1
month, e.g. gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than
skin rash) to contrast agents

@ = Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood
pressure >185mmHg or diastolic blood
pressure >110mmHg)

@ = Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be
expected to survive more than half a year

@ Current participation in any investigational study that may
confound outcome assessment of the study

e@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is
inappropriate for participation in the trial or could impose
hazards to the patient (e.g. inability to understand and/or
follow the study procedures and/or follow-up due to mental
disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

e@ = Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute large vessel occlusion on magnetic resonance/
computed tomography angiography, including internal
carotid artery (ICA), middle cerebral artery M1 segment
(MCA-M1) , vertebral artery and basilar artery

Study Drug Active drug: rhTNK-tPA freeze-dried powder injection, 1.0x
1071U/16mg per vial
5

[PDF_PAGE 72]
Control drug: aspirin, size: 100mg or
clopidogrel, size: 75mg
Bought and provided free of charge by the sponsor.

Treatment Assignment | Patients will be randomized to rhTNK-tPA or standard medical
treatment, in a 1:1 ratio with minimization algorithm.
Interventional arm (rhTNK-tPA)

The recommended total dose for this study is weight-based with
0.25mg of rhTNK-tPA per kg, not exceeding a maximum dose of
25mg. Each vial is reconstituted with 3ml sterile water for
injection by gentle shaking until completely dissolved. Vigorous
shaking should be avoided to prevent foam formation, which may
reduce efficacy. A single bolus dose should be administered over
5-10 seconds based on patient weight.

Control arm (standard medical treatment)

Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel alone) at the discretion
of local investigators according to Chinese Guidelines for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2023.

All patients will be treated according to Chinese Guidelines for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2023 and
Chinese Guideline for the Secondary Prevention of Ischemic
Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack 2022.

Criteria for Evaluation | Primary efficacy endpoint

@ Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an
mRS of 0-1 at 90 (+7) days

Secondary efficacy endpoints

@ Ordinal MRS score at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an
mRS of 0-2 at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) h,
defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by
CTP

@ = Infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h, measured by CT scan at 24
(-2/#12) h

@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 (-
2/+12) h, defined as a NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop
of 28 from baseline

@ NIHSS change from baseline at 7 (+2) days/discharge
(whichever is earlier)

@ Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-5D-5L) at 90
(+7) days

Safety endpoints

@ Proportion of patients with symptomatic intracranial
hemorrhage (sICH) within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification

6

[PDF_PAGE 73]
@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, as defined
by The Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue
Plasminogen Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries
(GUSTO): moderate and severe bleeding

@ = Mortality at 90 (+7) days

Study Schedule Baseline, 0 h, 24 (-2/+12) h, 48 (+6) h, 7 (+2) days/discharge
(whichever is earlier), 90 (+7) days

Sample Size The total sample size is 568. A total of 568 enrolled patients will
be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to the Interventional arm (rhTNK-
tPA, 284 cases) and control arm (standard medical treatment,
284 cases).

Interim Analysis The original protocol specified that, the safety interim analyses
will occur when the first 100, 200, and 300 patients completed 90-
day follow-up. One efficacy interim analysis will be taken place
when 50% of the target sample size (284 cases) have completed
90-day follow-up. The data safety and monitoring board (DSMB)
will review the data at the planned interim analysis and may
recommend stopping the study early for safety concerns, efficacy
results or futility.

Due to the fast speed of enrollment, after review with the DSMB

in June 2028, the original interim analysis plan no longer serves
its purpose. On the recommendation of the DSMB, the Steering

Committee decided to rescind the planned efficacy interim

analysis and the third safety analysis. Since no formal
assessment of efficacy is done and no alpha is spent, we will not
adjust the alpha level or p values for the final analysis.

Statistical Analysis The efficacy analyses will be based on intention-to-treat (ITT)
population. The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in
the ITT population using modified Poisson regression to
determine the risk ratio (RR) and its 95% confidence interval (Cl).
Since the efficacy interim analysis is rescinded, the final efficacy
analysis will be performed at the 0.05 significance level.

Subgroup Analysis The predefined subgroups including:

@ Age (<65 years and 2 65 years);

@ = Time from symptom onset to randomization (4.5-9 hours and
9-24 hours and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and 2 10);

@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior
circulation);

@ Occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA, M3-M4 segment of
MCA, ACA, PCA and stenosis);

© Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and 2100 mg/dL);

@ Baseline systolic blood pressure ($140 mmHg and >140
mmHg).

7

[PDF_PAGE 74]
Table of Contents
Signature Page for SOONSOFS .......ssecceccssesseecsecsecsecsnecsnecsnecssecssecsneecsnecsnecsnecsnecsseesseceneeeseee
Signature Page for Site Researchers ...........eseeseeceeseeseceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenesneeneenesnteneeeteeneeeeeeneee
Protocol SYNOPSIS ......ssessessstessteesesesnessnecsnecsneesnecssecnccnceanecsuecanecsnecssessneesnessaetsresnecennessnessns
Table of Contents .........ssescsessecssecsecsneesssesssecssecssessnecssecsnecessesseessecsnesssessnecsnessnessneenseesneeesees
List of Abbreviations...........escescececseesessesseesesseceesseeseseeseeensenseneeseesessessnesesenssneensensseeeaeeeeeeeee VT
A, BACKQFOUNG.....seesssessessnescsessecsnecsnessnecsnecsnecsuecssnesssecnnessnecsnecsnsesnessasetsesnacennesanessnesssessnees TA
2. ODjOCHIVE ......seecseesssessescsnecenecesecssecssecesscesessuecsnecssecssecssecssesstessecsnecsnecssecssecsneessecsseessecese TD
3B. StUdY DOSIQN.......cececcccesccseseesesestesesnensseenesesnesssnenssesrssessssesnssesesssessssesesssssssesessesnsseeeesaee TD
3.1 Overall DESIQN .......seessecssscsnessneesstecseecnecsnecsecsnecsnessnecsneecneecssessecssecsnessnesenecsneesnees TD
3.2 POPUlAtiON.....eeeeseeeseseeeseesteseeeeeenecneeneesecsesseesneessneeneesecnesneeseenesneeatseseseneeneeneeneeneeee VT
3.2.1 INCIUSION Criteria... eesesesseseseeseseeseseessseeesesessseesseensssensaneesssensseersseaeenee TE
3.2.2 EXxClUSION Criteria ......sseseescsessssesseecsecsnessnecssecsnecsnecssncssecnsessnecssecsneeeneeessersee 1B.
3.3 Randomization and BIINding ..........scecsecseesssesseessecsesssecssecsneesseesssesseecssessseesneessee 20,
3.3.1 RANGOMIZALION 20... ecsesecsesesseseseeseseeseseessseesssesessssesseeessecessneesssensseaeensseessse ZO.
3.3.2 Blind D@SIQN ........sccsesssesesssssesseesseseesecseesessecssesssessseeseeseeseesetsessesssesesessneees 20,
3.4 Therapeutic Strategies ..........seessecseecseeseesecsecsseesseesseesseesseessecssecsseesseenseesseessee 2d
3.4.1 Administration ADPrOach ........s.seeseseeeseeseseresseeeestsesesseeesseeessrensetssseseseeseetee 2d
3.4.2 Concomitant THErADY.......sseecseecsecsecsneeeneesseesnecsessecsecsnecsneessesseeseeseeene ld]
3.4.3 Pharmaceutical Incompatibility .............eeceesseseceseeeeeecneeeeeseeseeneeseeseeeneeeeene 22
3.5 Drug ACCOUNADIIItY .... eseessescsessneesnecsneesnessstessecnseessessnessnecsnsssasessnessueennersneesneesnes 2
3.5.1 Pharmaceutical PACKAGING «......scsesssessecsecsneesnecssecssecessesstesssecseesneesseesnee De
3.5.2 Storage Condition 0.0... cesesscseseeseseeseseesesessesesneseseensscenesessseensssanesssseneseenene 2
3.5.3 Management, Dispensing, Recycle and DiSpOS€ «0... 2d
3.6 Study SCHEUIC .......sscecseecssessneesstesseesseessessecsecsnessneessecssessessessecsnessnessneesneesnee 2D
3.6.1 Visit 0 (Baseline, RANdOMIZATION) .........eeeseeseseeseseeseseetestenestenenesteneeeeneneenene DA
3.6.5 Visit 4 (7 [+2] days /discharge [whichever is Carlier]) «1... 26
3.6.6 Visit 5 (90 [+7] dayS) .......cecesseesesseesesesenessesseeeeeseeseesessesseseseneeseeseesesseeseeres ZO
3.7 Brain Imaging Requirements and Collection..........cscsessessscseceeeesseseesseeneeeneeeee 28
3.7.1 IMAGING REQUIFED......seseescseesstesseecstecsnessnecssecsnecenecsstesseecsessnecssecsnecsneeessensne 2D
3.7.2 Imaging Data Management...........cceseseeceeseeeeceeeeeeeeesesseseneeeseteneeneeneeneeee 2B,
3.8 Endpoints of the Climical Trial .......ssssessesssesneesneesneesneesneeeneessnesneenessneenneesneeenee 28
3.8.1 Efficacy EMGDOINt ........seecseesssesseessecsneesnecssecsnecenecessesseecssessnecssecsneceneeessensne 2D
3.8.2 Safety EMApoints ..........seeceeceeceesessecseeeeeeeeneeneeneenecneeseeseeneeseeneenseneeseeneeneeee 2)
4. Data Management .......ssesssessseesseesneecsessessnecsnessneesnecsneesneessnessnecsnessneessessneesneeeanetsersaeese 2
4.1 Data entry And MOnitoring........cecssecsecsseseseesseesseecnsessessecssecsnessseessesneessesseesees 2D
4.2 Data Quality ASSUPANCE....... es eeseseeseseeseseeseseeneneeneneseeneaeensssenessanessanensseeneseeneseanenee DO

8

[PDF_PAGE 75]
4.3 Database LOCK... esessesesseesnessneesneesneesneenstesneesneessessnessnessneessnesnesneeeaesseesneess OO,
5. Statistical Considerations and Analysis PAN ........sssssessseessesseeseesesseeseesneesneenseesseeen SO
5.1 SAMPle SiZO oes eeee cesses eeseeseseseeseseeneseeseseaerssnesssesnesnersseenssesnesssteseseensseeeseenenseee OO
5.2 Analysis Population .......ssssssessessssessecneesneesneesneesneecnsessessnecnnessneesnecsnessneensseeneeenee OT
5.3 Statistical ANALYSIS .........sccsseccseesseesseecsesssessseessecsseesseesseesseessnessneessecsneesneessenneeenee OT
5.3.1 General Principles ...........cesesseseseesesseseseeseseeseseetessenensseensseensseesstetsseereeaeenene oT
5.3.2 Summaries of Conduct Of Study ......ececseesnessneesseernecneeseeseeneesneesneesneeO2
5.3.3 Summaries of Demographic and Baseline Characteristics ............000382
5.3.4 Compliance to TreatMent...........eecesecsesessesesseseseesseesseesssensasetesseesaeesaeenene Ok
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy EMGDOINt........sscseessessecsecsneesneesseesneecneeesecsecnseesneesseesnee OR
5.3.6 Secondary Efficacy ENdpoint ...........escecsscsseeseeseesseesssesseesseesesseeseesse OD
5.3.7 Missing Data Processing ..........scsssessesssssessessesseeseessesessnesneesseneensesseeseeeseens OF
5.3.8 Safety ANAIVSES.......sescssecsseesssecseessecsnessnecssecsnecsneceseesseccsnessnecsseceneceneeessessee OF
5.3.9 Subgroup AMAlySis .......-.esceceecsecessecseseeseeeseeseeneeeeeneeseesesneeeneeneeseneeneeneeneeee OD.

6. Assessment Of Safety ......ssecsereesneecsersnecseesnersneesneesneesneessessneesnessneesniennesneesnetsneesess OO
6.1 Definitions Of AE ANd SAE.......esesesescseessessecsnecsnessneesseesneesneessesssecsnessneesneesneessees OO
6.1.1 Examples Of AM AE......eseescecsecesessecseeseseeseneeneeneeseenseseesesneesteeneeneeneeneeneeneee OO,
6.1.2 Events not Meeting the AE Definition .........scescsssesesessesseeseeseesenesteseeene OL
6.1.3 Examples Of An SAE .....cecssecsssesssessessnessneessecsneeeseesseesseesseesseesseesneesneessnensee OT
6.1.4 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR)................38,

6.2 AE and SAE Reporting Period «......sssessesssesneesneesneesneesneeeneessneeneeneeseenneesneeenee OB
6.3 Follow-Up Of AE/SAE ......cscssesssecseesseesseesssessseesnecssessneessecsneesseessecsecsnessneessecsneesnees OD
6.4 Recording and Severity Categorization of AE aNd SAE ...........sesesceeeeseeeeeeeene ee OD
6.4.1 Recording Of AE/SAE .....sssessssesssecsecsnessneesnecsnessnseesnecseecnessnecsnecsneeeneeesneesne OD
6.4.2 Severity Categorization ........secseeceecsserecsecseesneesseesseesssesssessecsneesneesseesse A)
6.4.3 Assessment of Causality of AE And SAE........csssessesseseseeseeetesesseeeteeeeneeee 4)

6.5 Reporting Requirements Of SAE .......csessesseeseesneecssesseesnecsessneesnecsnessneessserseeeneee Ad
6.6 Reporting SAE to the SPONSOF.........sssecssesssesseessecsesseesecsneesseesseessessneesseesneessee A,
6.7 Management of Patients Who Experience AE ........c.ssessessscseseesssteseesteeresenteene eA
TZ. Ethical Considerations ..........ssscssesecssesssecsecsneesnecssecsseecnsecssessecsneseneesseesseesneessseesseeseees AO
7.1 Informed COmSent........eeeeseeeeeceecseceeesessecseeseseesensensenesneeneesesseseeessesensentenseneeneesee AD
7.2 Benefits and Risks Of the Study ........ssesssesssesneesneesneesneesneesneessnecneeneesneesneesneesee 4D
7.2.1 Potential Benefit and Risk in Interventional AIM... AS
7.2.2 Potential Benefit and Risk in Control ArM.........-seseseessecteeeseeeesseeeeeeeeee AB
7.2.3 RiSk-benefit RAtIO.....seccseessereeneesneesneesneesneesneessnesneeneessneesnessnessneeessesse AO

7.3 Confidentiality .........cesssecssscsesssecsssesseessesssesssecsecssessneessesseessessessecsessnecseesneeenee
7.4 Study Discontinuation or Withdraw Criteria ........ eee eeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeneneeeee 4B
7.4.1 Discontinuation of Individual Patients ..........cssssesesecneeseeseesneesneesneess AB
7.4.2 Withdrawal Criteria of Individual Pationts ...........csscssscseesessecseesneesnees se AB
7.4.3 Study DiSCONtiNUALION «0... ees eeseseeeseeeseeeeseeeeseeeensseensetenserensseenseeeeesesees ee AQ,
7.4.4 Management of Patients Discontinuation or Withdrawal... 4d

8. Study Management and Monitoring ..........scsecsecseeseesneesseesseesessneesecsseesneerssesseesseee AQ)
8.1 Protocol AMENAMENES .........scesssceessseereseessseseseseesssessssenssseseesssessesessssenesseeesseeeess AO
8.2 Quality COMOL.......sessecsecsneecneesssesseecseecsecsecsecsnessnessnecneecsessecsecsnessneesneesneessees OO.

9

[PDF_PAGE 76]
8.2.1 Study Monitoring of the SPOMSOM ......sesesseesneesneesseesneeeneeesterseenneesneesneesees OO.

8.2.2 Study Monitoring of the Sites .........ccsecsseeseesseeesessessecsneesneesseesseesneeesneeene OT

8.2.3 Site INSPOCHIONS .......... ee eseesesseseseeseseeseseeeseeteneseeseseeneseeeseensseenssestensseeeseeters OD

Q. Organizational Structure .......ssscseccessssesseecnseseesneesnecsnessneesseesseesnnessnecsnecsneesnessneesseeeneest OD
9.1 Trials Boards and Committees ........ccssecseesssesseessecsessneessecsneesneesseesseecsnessneesseesne OL
9.1.1 Steering COMMIttCE ..... ee eeseseeseseesesesteseetesestessseensseensstensssensssensasseesseenere OD

9.1.2 Executive COMMITEE ......ecessecneesneesneeseesneeeneessecsecneesnecsneenneeeneeesteee OD

9.1.3 Data Safety and Monitoring BOard........ccsscsessecseessesnseesesseenesseeseesee OD.

9.1.4 Clinical Events Committee «0.0... es ecceeseeeeeseseeeseeneseensstenseseeeseeesaneseeene OD

9.1.5 Imaging Core LAbOrAtOry ......seseecsecsneesneesneesneeeneesstesseeneesneesecsneesneeesseee OD

9.2 Site Training and Certification «00.0... essesecsecseeeeeseesseeeneessesseesesseeneeseessee OD

10. Study Report and Publications ..........cceeccssecssseeesssseesseensseesseesscseenssessssesssseenssesesenee OF
10.1 Study Registration And RESUItS........essecsecsneesneesssecsecneessieesecsecsneesneesseeeneee OF
10.2 Publication Of RESUItS ..........ceseeeeseeseeeeceeseeeeeeseseeseeessneeneenesnesseeensenseneeneeneeneeees OD,

11. Funding and Conflict of Interest ........scsssessesssersecneesneesneesneesneesneesseesneesnessneesneesnesseees OO
12. REFEFENCES......eseeessessseesssesseecseecsnecsnecssecssecesecesesssesnecsnecssecsnecesecssensessecseesseeseesneessess OD
Appendix 1: modified Rankin SCale..........eceeeeeecteceeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeeeeneenesnteateenssteeeenseeeeee BO
Appendix 2: National Institutes of Health Stroke SCAl@........sseseesessneesneesneesneeeneeesterneeen OZ,
Appendix 3: Glasgow Coma Scale ........sesecsscsessnessssesneesseessesseesessnessneessesneessesseesseess OO.
Appendix 4: EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level Questionnaire .............seseeseseeseseeseeeeteseeneseee OD

10

[PDF_PAGE 77]
List of Abbreviations
sR ares
Pe saat
DWI or CTP Assessment with Clinical Mismatch in the Triage
DAWN of Wake-Up and Late Presenting Strokes Undergoing
Neurointervention with Trevo
Ischemic Stroke 3
Endovascular Therapy Plus Best Medical Treatment (BMT)
DISTAL versus BMT alone for Medium Vessel Occlusion Stroke-A
Pragmatic, International, Multicentre, Randomized Trial
[oie airport
Vessel Occlusions
1

[PDF_PAGE 78]
rater
Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen
GUSTO
pore | ar cenanane
8 nests rcs
ert nraiza aso
i
[Rt Wasi sear imaging
oR ai aio
PP Piranesi
Rae
12

[PDF_PAGE 79]
13

[PDF_PAGE 80]
1. Background
Large vessel occlusion (LVO) is a common cause of acute ischemic stroke
(AIS) and usually defined as obstruction of proximal vessels, including the
internal carotid artery (ICA), first segment of the middle cerebral artery (MCA-
M1), vertebral artery and basilar artery. The therapeutic time window for
endovascular therapy (EVT) in acute anterior circulation LVO has been
extended to 24 hours [1,2]. For patients within 4.5 hours from symptom onset
(defined as last-seen-well), bridging therapy is recommended. For those
within 4.5-6 hours from symptom onset, EVT should be considered with
routine imaging assessment. For patients with anterior circulation LVO within
6-24 hours from onset, EVT should be performed if meeting DWI or CTP
Assessment with Clinical Mismatch in the Triage of Wake-Up and Late
Presenting Strokes Undergoing Neurointervention with Trevo (DAWN) or
Endovascular Therapy Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic Stroke
(DEFUSE-3) eligibility criteria [1,3-5]. However, the MR CLEAN randomized
trial and CT for Late Endovascular Reperfusion (CLEAR) studies suggest
benefit with EVT compared to medical management in the 6 to 24 hour
window with non-contrast CT selection [6,7]. Since the completion of
Endovascular Treatment for Acute Basilar Artery Occlusion (ATTENTION)
trial and Basilar Artery Occlusion Chinese Endovascular Trial (BAOCHE),
EVT in posterior circulation LVO within 24 hours from onset has been proven
effective and safe [8,9].
Current level 1A EVT recommendations for AIS are restricted to patients with
LVO, while less is known about the effectiveness and safety of EVT in
patients with non-LVO. Small/perforating vessel occlusion is not suitable for
EVT due to its small caliber. Distal medium vessel occlusion (DMVO) includes
the M2 to M4 MCA segment, anterior cerebral artery (ACA), posterior cerebral
artery (PCA), posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and superior
cerebellar artery (SCA) [10]. The longer, more tortuous access route and

14

[PDF_PAGE 81]
thinner arterial walls potentially increase the risk of dissection, perforation,
and vasospasm. DMVO loop around key neuroanatomic structures including
the corpus callosum, insula, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe. Although
technological advances have made EVT feasible in DMVO, the procedural
difficulty and associated risks may be higher compared to those for LVO
[5,11]. The Endovascular Treatment to Improve Outcomes for Medium Vessel
Occlusions (ESCAPE-MeVO) and Endovascular Therapy plus Best Medical
Treatment [BMT] versus BMT Alone for Medium Vessel Occlusion Stroke- A
Pragmatic, International, Multicenter, Randomized Trial (DISTAL) trials
showed that thrombectomy added no clinical benefit as compared with best
medical management alone in stroke due to medium-vessel occlusion.
Furthermore, thrombectomy appeared to show higher mortality [12,13]. Other
non-LVO (e.g. watershed infarction caused by intracranial/extracranial
stenosis) also lack evidence for EVT. Intravenous thrombolysis is the only
proven effective reperfusion therapy in patients with non-LVO.

Only 5-20% of AIS patients receive intravenous thrombolysis, and this small
proportion is mainly related to the short therapeutic time window (4.5 hours)
[14]. Computed tomography perfusion (CTP) or perfusion weighted imaging
(PWI) enable the differentiation of salvageable ischemic tissue beyond 4.5
hours from onset [15]. Previous study showed that there may be salvageable
brain tissue as late as 24 hours in approximately half of AIS patients [16].
Reperfusion induced by intravenous thrombolysis may improve clinical
outcomes in the extended time window [17-19]. The Echoplanar Imaging
Thrombolytic Evaluation Trial (EPITHET) enrolled 101 patients within 3-6
hours after symptom onset, among whom 85 (86%) showed PWI-diffusion-
weighted imaging (DWI) mismatch. The study found no significant benefit of
intravenous thrombolysis [20]. The fourth European Cooperative Acute Stroke
Study (ECASS-4) included 119 AIS patients within 4.5-9 hours after onset
with PWI-DWI mismatch, but did not demonstrate better functional outcomes
in the alteplase (rt-PA) group [21]. The Extending the Time for Thrombolysis

[PDF_PAGE 82]
in Emergency Neurological Deficits (EXTEND) trial enrolled 225 AIS patients
within 4.5-9 hours after onset with CT/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
core-perfusion mismatch, showing a higher rate of favorable outcomes in the
rt-PA group (modified Rankin scale (MRS) 0-1: 35.4% vs. 29.5%, p = 0.04)
[22]. While a previous meta-analysis of the EXTEND, ECASS-4:ExTEND, and
EPITHET trials indicated that the rt-PA group had a higher proportion of
excellent functional outcome compared to the placebo group (mRS 0-1:36%
vs. 29%, adjusted odds ratio (aOR) =1.86, 95% confidence interval (Cl),1.15-
2.99, p = 0.01), there was a higher incidence of symptomatic intracranial
hemorrhage (sICH) (5% vs. <1%, AOR=9.7, 95%Cl,1.23-76.55, p = 0.03), and
no significant difference in mortality (14% vs. 9%, AOR=1.55, 95%Cl, 0.81-
2.96, p = 0.19)[19]. Further subgroup analysis including 303 patients with
core-perfusion mismatch and completed 90-day assessment showed that the
rt-PA group had a higher proportion of excellent functional outcome compared
to the placebo group, with a larger point estimate of effect size (mRS 0-1:
36% vs. 26%, AOR=2.06, 95%Cl, 1.17-3.62, p = 0.01). In this subgroup
analysis, all efficacy outcomes were significantly improved in the rt-PA group,
and safety outcomes showed no significant differences compared to the
placebo group. Additionally, the effect of rt-PA was independent of the
presence of LVO (pinteraction=0.99), suggesting that non-LVO patients selected
by perfusion imaging in the extended time window may benefit from
intravenous thrombolysis.

In summary, intravenous thrombolysis may be a safe and effective
reperfusion treatment for acute non-LVO patients selected by perfusion
imaging in the extended time window. Recombinant human TNK tissue-type
plasminogen activator (rhTNK-tPA), a genetically modified variant of rt-PA,
exhibits higher fibrin specificity and longer half-life, allowing single bolus
administration. Existing data suggest that this novel thrombolytic agent is as
safe as rt-PA, with trends toward higher rates of vascular recanalization and
favorable functional outcomes [23-27]. Therefore, we design a multicenter,

[PDF_PAGE 83]
prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point (PROBE) trial to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of rhTNK-tPA in acute non-LVO patients
presenting within 4.5-24 hours after onset and selected by perfusion imaging.
2. Objective
To test efficacy and safety of intravenous rhTNK-tPA in patients presenting
within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have a non-LVO and evidence
of salvageable tissue on perfusion imaging.
3. Study Design
3.1 Overall Design
This is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point,
controlled clinical trial. Participants are randomly assigned to receive rhTNK-
tPA or standard medical treatment.
ad
I J
Figure 1. Study Flow Chart
3.2 Population
3.2.1 Inclusion Criteria
Clinical inclusion criteria
@ Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
@ Age 218 years
17

[PDF_PAGE 84]
@ Pre-stroke mRS score 0-1

@ Disabling stroke, defined as follows:
Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score 6-25 at

the time of randomization, Or NIHSS 4-5 with disabling deficit (e.g.

hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand function) as determined by the managing

clinician

@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h of treatment initiation (onset time refers to
“last-seen-well”)

@ Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible
representatives

Imaging inclusion criteria

@ Target mismatch profile on CTP defined as an ischemic core volume (using
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF)<30% on CTP) <50mL, a mismatch ratio
(Time-to-maximum (Tmax)>6 sec volume to ischemic core ratio) 21.2, and
a mismatch volume (Tmax>6 sec volume- ischemic core volume) 210mL.

3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria

Clinical exclusion criteria

@ Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or intention to
receive intravenous thrombolysis

@ Contraindications to thrombolysis

@ Planned or anticipated treatment with EVT

@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if in the judgement of the
managing clinician is likely to result ina NIHSS <4 at randomization

@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in woman of childbearing
potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation factor
deficiency

@ Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or anticoagulant use.

18

[PDF_PAGE 85]
If on warfarin, international normalized ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin
time >15s; if use of any direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if
use of heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ Use of glycoprotein IIb-IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/yL

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe renal
insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate <30mL/min or serum
creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

e@ Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last 1 month, e.g.
gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than skin rash) to
contrast agents

@ Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >185mmHg or
diastolic blood pressure >110mmHg)

@ Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be expected to survive
more than half a year

@ Current participation in any investigational study that may confound
outcome assessment of the study

@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is inappropriate for
participation in the trial or could impose hazards to the patient (e.g. inability
to understand and/or follow the study procedures and/or follow-up due to
mental disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

e@ Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute LVO on MRICT angiography, including ICA, MCA-M1, vertebral
artery and basilar artery

Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be assessed based on information

available during the screening period. There will be no retrospective exclusion

[PDF_PAGE 86]
of patients based on information coming to knowledge later on.
3.3 Randomization and Blinding
3.3.1 Randomization
Eligible patients are randomized to treatment with either rhTNK-tPA or
standard medical treatment with a ratio of 1:1. Randomization uses a
minimization process to balance the numbers of patients across the two arms
with respect to vessel occlusion location (anterior or posterior circulation), age
(<65 or 265 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or 216) and center.
The randomization will be done by a computerized central interactive web
response system (IWRS). Once the patient meets all eligibility criteria and the
consent is signed, the center investigator will enter basic patient information
and minimization factors into IWRS and the system will generate a random
number and subject ID according to the above principles. After receiving the
results of randomization, the center investigator will assign patients to the
appropriate treatment according to the grouping as soon as possible.
Patients not eligible after screening in IWRS will be recorded as screen
failures and not be enrolled.
3.3.2 Blind Design
This study is an open-label trial. An unbiased investigator, who is blinded to
the allocated assignment and actual treatment, will assess the in-hospital data
relevant to the study outcomes. Assessments of the primary endpoint on the
mRS at 90 (+7) days will be performed by a qualified neurologist via
centralized telephone interview, blinded to the allocated and actually received
treatment. The interviewee should be the patient themselves or co-residing
caregivers. All telephone interviews are recorded into follow-up reports, which
will be then assessed by another neurologist, blinded to the allocated and
actually received treatment, based on the reports.

20

[PDF_PAGE 87]
3.4 Therapeutic Strategies
3.4.1 Administration Approach
Interventional arm: rhTNK-tPA
Patients allocated in this arm will receive intravenous thrombolysis with
rhTNK-tPA (0.25mg/kg, not exceeding a maximum dose of 25mg). Each vial
is reconstituted with 3 mL sterile water for injection by gentle shaking until
completely dissolved. Vigorous shaking should be avoided to prevent foam
formation, which may reduce efficacy. A single bolus dose should be
administered over 5-10 seconds based on patient weight.
Control arm: Standard medical treatment
Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel alone) is administered at the
discretion of local investigators*.
*Aspirin (150-300mg) is offered to patients allocated in the control arm, unless
contraindicated. According to Chinese Guidelines for Diagnosis and
Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2023, 150-300mg aspirin alone is
recommended for acute stroke treatment in patients who are otherwise
eligible for intravenous thrombolysis or EVT as soon as possible (Class 1 of
recommendation, Level A of evidence). The aspirin dose can be changed to
50-300 mg/day after the acute phase. Clopidogrel is indicated as an
alternative in case of aspirin intolerance (Class 2 of recommendation, Level C
of evidence) [28].
All study drugs should be administered as soon as possible within 1 hour after
randomization.
3.4.2 Concomitant Therapy
All the enrolled patients are treated according to Chinese Guidelines for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2023 and Chinese
Guideline for the Secondary Prevention of Ischemic Stroke and Transient
Ischemic Attack 2022 [28,29]. Patients who have received intravenous
thrombolysis or who are intended to receive intravenous thrombolysis are

21

[PDF_PAGE 88]
excluded. Also, those who are planned or anticipated to treat with EVT are
excluded from the study (as described in 3.2.2). Any anti-platelet agent is
prohibited for 24 hours after the rhTNK-tPA administration, including aspirin,
clopidogrel, ticagrelor, glycoprotein IIb/Illa receptor. Oral or parenteral
anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin, dabigatran, heparin, low molecular weight
heparin, argatroban) are prohibited for the first 24 hours in interventional and
control arms.
Concomitant therapy consists of any medication used by a patient in addition
to protocol-mandated treatment for 7 days prior to initiation of study drug to
the completion/discontinuation visit. All such medications should be reported
to the investigator and recorded on the electronic Case Report Form (eCRF).
3.4.3 Pharmaceutical Incompatibility
thTNK-tPA should be prepared using sterile water for injection; normal saline
(0.9% sodium chloride) or glucose solutions are not recommended. rhTNK-
tPA must not be mixed with other medications, neither in the same syringe nor
through the same intravenous line (including heparin).
3.5 Drug Accountability
3.5.1 Pharmaceutical Packaging
The sponsor will package medications according to the total dosage required
per patient. Packaging and labeling will comply with regulatory and legal
requirements, clearly marked as "For Clinical Research Use Only". All kits will
be delivered by Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University to participating
centers.
3.5.2 Storage Condition
The study drugs are provided by the sponsor. Authorized personnel are
responsible for receiving the investigational medicinal products at each
research center. Personnel in each research center should strictly comply with
the regulations outlined in Good Clinical Practice (GCP). All study drugs must
be managed strictly abiding to requirements by the sponsor.

22

[PDF_PAGE 89]
At centers, study medication must be stored in a secure place with restricted
access to qualified personnel until dispensed to patients. Study drugs are
exclusively for research use in this trial and should not be delivered for other
purposes.
The investigators should ensure that study drugs are used only in accordance
with the approved protocol.
3.5.3 Management, Dispensing, Recycle and Dispose
The storage and shipment of study drugs are strictly in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Responsible personnel should know and
establish a detailed record for the receipt, storage, distribution and recycling
of study drugs. All the study drugs are delivered on the prescriptions of the
researchers and documented upon delivery and recycling. Center
investigators are prohibited from offering the study drugs for other purposes.
After enrollment, authorized research nurses will prepare and administer
intravenous rhTNK-tPA or dispense oral drugs as per the protocol. Unused
study drugs are required to be recycled and disposed of according to relevant
regulations and corresponding records must be retained.
3.6 Study Schedule
The study consists of three periods: screening (VO), treatment (V1) and follow
up (V2, V3, V4, V5). If a suspected or confirmed adverse event (AE) occurs,
necessary assessment can be performed. Such visits must be documented in
both eCRF and original records.
Procedure/ Screening Treatment Follow-up
Investigation vo V1 v2 V3 V4 V5
Time Baseline Oh 24 48 7 (+2) days 90 (+7)
(-2/+12) h (+6) h /discharge 9 days
Informed consent x
Inclusion/exclusion criteria x
Demographic data * x
Medical history » x
Concomitant medication x x x x x
Vital signs © x xX xX xX
23

[PDF_PAGE 90]
ECG x
Laboratory tests 4 x x
Imaging ° x x x*
mRS‘ x x x
NIHSS x x x x
Gcs Xx Xx x Xx
EQ-5D-5L x
BI x
Randomization x
Study medication administration xX
AEs/SAEs x x x x x
Study completion x
Abbreviation: AEs, Adverse Events; Bl, Barthel index; ECG, electrocardiography; EQ-5D-
5L, EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; mRS,
Modified Rankin Scale; NIHSS, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale; SAEs, Serious
Adverse Events.
2 Demographic data include date of birth, sex, ethnic group, body height, body weight.
> Medical history include history of present illness, past medical history, family history,
drug allergies, smoking and alcohol use.
Vital signs include temperature, blood pressure and heart rate.
“Laboratory tests include hematology, liver and renal function, coagulation profile and
glucose; pregnancy test is limited to women of child bearing potential.
© Brain CT+CTA +CTP.
‘Baseline mRS is defined as a pre-stroke score.
8Whichever is earlier.
*Repeat CT is recommended, if possible; if symptom deterioration with suspected
intracranial hemorrhage occurs during hospitalization, an immediate CT scan should be
performed.
3.6.1 Visit 0 (Baseline, Randomization)
For each patients deemed eligible for the study by the investigator written
informed consent will be contained from the patient or the patient’s
representative prior to the performance of any protocol-related investigation.
During the screening period, the following assessments will be performed in
patients for whom written informed consent has been obtained:
@ Checking of inclusion and exclusion criteria
@ Collection of demographic data (date of birth, sex, ethnic group, body
height, body weight)
@ Collection of medical history (history of present illness, past medical
24

[PDF_PAGE 91]
history, family history, drug allergies, smoking and alcohol use)

@ Collection of concomitant medication (one week prior to randomization)

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

e@ A 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG)

@ Screening laboratory tests including blood routine, renal and liver
function, coagulation profile and glucose; pregnancy test in women of
childbearing potential (urinary test)

@ Imaging examination (a brain CT+CTA+CTP scan)

@ Pre-stroke mRS score

@ Baseline NIHSS score

e@ Assessment of the Glasgow coma scale (GCS)

Patients who meet the inclusion criteria but not the exclusion criteria will be

randomized.

3.6.2 Visit 1(0 h)

@ Administration of the study drug (the study medication has to be
administered as soon as possible and not later than 60 minutes after
randomization)

@ Assessment of AE/ serious adverse events (SAE)

3.6.3 Visit 2 [24 (-2/+12) h

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

@ Laboratory tests including blood routine, liver and renal function, glucose
and coagulation profile

@ Imaging examination (a brain CT+CTA+CTP scan)

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.6.4 Visit 3 [48 (+6) h

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

25

[PDF_PAGE 92]
@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.6.5 Visit 4 (7 [+2] days /discharge [whichever is earlier])

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ Measurement of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure and heart rate)

@ Imaging examination (a repeat CT scan is recommended, if possible; if
symptom deterioration with suspected intracranial hemorrhage occurs
during hospitalization, an immediate CT scan should be performed)

@ mRS score

@ NIHSS score

@ Assessment of the GCS

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.6.6 Visit 5 (90 [+7] days)

@ Documentation of any concomitant medication

@ mRS score

@ Assessment of functional health status and quality of life using the EQ-
5D-5L

@ Barthel index (BI)

@ Assessment of AE/ SAE

3.7 Brain Imaging Requirements and Collection

All participating centers demonstrate capacity to perform CTP examinations.

The neuroimaging protocol mandates axial coverage extending 280 mm of the

brain scan. All sites are required to use CTPDoc (Shukun, Beijing, China)

software to provide brain imaging assessments. The software will be installed

in each center before enrollment, and perform a dummy-run to assess image

quality and train the technologist in software handling. Precise details will vary

according to the CT scanner. A site will be activated for enrollment after four

26

[PDF_PAGE 93]
test cases processed independently with CTPDoc have ensured good quality
maps.
3.7.1 Imaging Required
3.7.1.1 Imaging of Visit 0
- Before randomization, a non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) should
be performed to rule out hemorrhage. The thickness of the NCCT scanning
layer is recommended to be 5 mm. Also, the NCCT study should include the
whole head.
- Before randomization, a CTA should be performed to rule out LVO [The
large vessels include: ICA, MCA-M1, vertebral artery and basilar artery]. The
CTA study should cover the whole area from the aortic arch to the vertex, and
intracranial part only is also acceptable.
Anatomic Definitions for M1: Horizontal segment of the proximal MCA from
the bifurcation of the ICA (into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries) to the
genu of the MCA branch or branches at the entrance to the insula.
-Before randomization, a CTP should be performed to confirm patient
eligibility based on inclusion and exclusion criteria.
- For CTP scanners, scanning layer is recommended to be 5 mm. The
intravenous iodinated contrast injected at 4-6mL/sec and initiation of
continuous arterial-phase scanning 4-8 seconds after contrast injection.
Imaging every 1.5-3.0 seconds will be acquired for 50-70 seconds.
3.7.1.2 Imaging of Visit 2
- ANCCT should be performed to assess intracranial hemorrhage and infarct
volume. The thickness of the NCCT scanning layer is recommended to be 5
mm. Also, the NCCT study should include the whole head.
- ACTA should be performed to assess treatment efficacy. The CTA study
should cover the whole area from the aortic arch to the vertex, and intracranial
part only is also acceptable.
- ACTP should be performed to assess reperfusion, defined as >90%

27

[PDF_PAGE 94]
reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by baseline CTP. Scanning parameters

and imaging equipment should be maintained as consistent as possible with

those used before randomization.

3.7.1.3 Imaging of Visit 4

- ANCCT is recommended to be reviewed. The thickness of the NCCT

scanning layer is recommended to be 5 mm. Also, the NCCT study should

include the whole head.

3.7.2 Imaging Data Management

All imaging data (including CT, CTA, CTP, and related imaging studies)

acquired during the patient's hospital course will be anonymized and

transmitted in Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM)

format to the core imaging laboratory for quality control and centralized

adjudication. Final determinations will undergo review and confirmation by the

core imaging laboratory before being entered into the study database.

Furthermore, because OPTION is a randomized, controlled trial, imaging

readers will be blinded to the patient's treatment assignment to reduce bias.

3.8 Endpoints of the Clinical Trial

3.8.1 Efficacy Endpoint

3.8.1.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint

Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90

(+7) days.

3.8.1.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Ordinal MRS score at 90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-2 at
90 (+7) days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) h, defined as >90%
reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP

@ = Infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h, measured by CT scan at 24 (-2/+12) h

@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) h, defined

28

[PDF_PAGE 95]
as a NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop of 28 from baseline
@ NIHSS change from baseline at 7 (+2) days/discharge (whichever is
earlier)
@ Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-5D-5L) at 90 (+7) days
3.8.2 Safety Endpoints
@ Proportion of patients with sICH within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification
@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, as defined by The Global
Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for
Occluded Coronary Arteries (GUSTO): moderate and severe bleeding
@ Mortality at 90 (+7) days
4. Data Management
4.1 Data entry and Monitoring
Data entered manually will be collected via Electronic Data Capture (EDC)
through the use of eCRF. Sites will be responsible for data collection and data
entry into the EDC system. Sites will receive training and have access to a
manual for appropriate eCRF completion. In the event of discrepant data, the
sponsor or investigator will request data clarification from the sites, which the
sites will resolve electronically in the EDC system. When correcting the data,
correction track, reasons for correction and the signature of investigator will
be maintained in the EDC system's audit trail. The sponsor staff or designated
third party should determine the extent of data monitoring within the context of
GCP. The sponsor or its designated representatives will confirm the queries
they have raised according to the clarification from the sites and they may
send a query again, if necessary, until all queries are resolved.
4.2 Data Quality Assurance
Before data verification, a detailed data verification plan (DVP) will be
developed to clarify the content, mode and requirements of data verification.
The data management plan (DMP) will be developed by data manager
29

[PDF_PAGE 96]
according to the protocol, and the data management tasks of clinical trial will
be specified and recorded in detail and comprehensively.
4.3 Database Lock
The database can be locked only if these conditions are met:
e@ All data have been collected, processed and stored;
@ All diagnosis codes have been checked and confirmed;
e@ All queries have been resolved;
@ Quality control tests of data have passed;
@ All source data have been verified and reviewed;
@ Consistency check from third-party data has been completed;
@ Consistency check of SAE has been completed;
@ Signatures of all investigators have been obtained;
@ Data possible to analyze have been defined;
@ The statistical analysis plan has been proved.
5. Statistical Considerations and Analysis Plan
5.1 Sample Size
The primary outcome in this study is the proportion of patients with mRS 0-1
at 90 (+7) days. The sample size is based on the primary outcome.
Based on the reported pooled data [19] of the stroke thrombolysis trials in the
extended time window, we expect a 12% absolute difference in the proportion
of patients reaching the primary outcome between patients treated with
rhTNK-tPA and standard medical treatment (expected rate of excellent
functional outcome 50% in patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and 38% in
patients treated with standard medical treatment). Considering the potential
impact of the one interim efficacy analysis on the probability of type | error, we
adjusted the alpha error to a two-sided alpha of 0.049. The total sample size
of 568 (n=284 per treatment group) will have 80% power to detect the
specified difference at the two-sided 0.049 significance level, with a 5%
dropout rate.

30

[PDF_PAGE 97]
Due to protocol amendments that eliminated the pre-specified interim efficacy
analysis, this study maintains the original two-sided alpha level of 0.05 and
the planned sample size of 568, with an increased the statistical power of
82.7%.
This estimation was performed based on PASS (NCSS, LLC.) version 15.0.
5.2 Analysis Population
Full analysis set (FAS): According to principles of the intention-to-treat (ITT),
all patients randomized into the group are included in the full analysis set,
even if the patient did not receive the correct treatment, or did not follow the
protocol until completion. The full analysis set will be the primary analysis
population for the efficacy endpoints and subjects will be analyzed according
to the treatment group to which they were assigned at randomization.
Per protocol set (PPS). It is defined as the subset of the FAS excluding major
protocol violators deemed to have the potential to affect patient outcome in
terms of efficacy. Major protocol violations or deviations will be identified in a
blinded fashion prior to database lock. Analysis will also be repeated
according to the PPS.
Safety analysis set (SS): The Safety Population includes all patients who
received treatment with at least one evaluation of the safety outcome. In case
of violation of the randomization scheme, patients will be classified according
to the treatment they actually received.
5.3 Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses will be performed using SAS Software version 9.4
(SAS Institute Inc) and R version 4.4.1 and will be performed upon a
predetermined statistical analysis plan (SAP).
5.3.1 General Principles
Demographic, baseline characteristics, and efficacy analyses will be based on
FAS. Safety analyses will be based on safety population. Data were
summarized by means and standard deviations, or medians (interquartile

31

[PDF_PAGE 98]
ranges) for continuous variables, and frequency along with percentage for

categorical variables.

5.3.2 Summaries of Conduct of Study

Summaries the number of patients assessed, randomized, treated and

completed study in each study center, and the reasons for premature study

discontinuation.

5.3.3 Summaries of Demographic and Baseline Characteristics

Demographic and baseline characteristics, such as age, sex, medical history

(hypertension, diabetes), and baseline stroke characteristics (such as

baseline NIHSS, trial of ORG 10172 in acute stroke treatment (TOAST) type),

will be summarized for all randomized patients using descriptive statistics.

Summaries will be presented overall and by treatment group.

5.3.4 Compliance to Treatment

Information about study medication used, reasons for discontinuation of study

medication, any drug prohibited were used, and concomitant medication

should be recorded. Summaries will be presented overall and by treatment

group.

5.3.5 Primary Efficacy Endpoint

The primary efficacy outcome is the proportion of excellent functional outcome

defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90 (+7) days. The analysis population for the

primary efficacy analysis will be performed on the FAS. Analysis will also be

repeated on the PPS. If its results are not consistent with that of the FAS, a

detailed analysis to examine the difference will be required.

Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis as follows:
Ho: Prntnk-tPa = Peontro! versus H1: Prntnk-tpa # Peontrol

Where Prtnk-ipa and Peontroi are the proportion of MRS score 0 to 1 at 90 (+7)

days in the group treated with rhTNK-tPA and standard medical treatment

(control group) respectively.

The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in the ITT population using

32

[PDF_PAGE 99]
modified Poisson regression model to determine the risk ratio (RR) and its
95% confidence interval (Cl). We will also perform adjusted analysis of the
primary outcome with adjustment for pre-specified covariates. Details will be
listed in the SAP of the study.
5.3.6 Secondary Efficacy Endpoints
For the analysis of ordinal mRS at 90 (+7) days, an ordinal logistic regression
model with treatment as the study variable will be used to calculate the
common odds ratio and corresponding 95% Cl between two treatment
groups. Prior to its application, the proportional odds assumption will be
tested. If the P-value for the overall score test of the proportional odds
hypothesis is >0.05, the proportional odds assumption will be deemed
acceptable. If the proportional odds hypothesis is rejected, the generalized
odds ratio (GenOR) with 95%CI will be calculated.
For the analysis of the following binary secondary efficacy endpoints, modified
Poisson regression model will be employed to determine RR and its 95% Cl:
@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-2 at
90 (+7) days
@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) hours, defined
as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP.
@ Proportion of early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) hours, defined as a
NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop of 28 from baseline
For the analysis of the following continuous secondary endpoints, linear
regression models will be employed. A transformation will be performed if
needed. A win ratio method will be used if normality assumption is seriously
violated:
@ = Infarct volume at 24(-2/+12) hours
@ NIHSS change from baseline to 7 (£2) days/discharge (whichever is
earlier)
@ Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-5D-5L) at 90 (+7) days
33

[PDF_PAGE 100]
Additional details of the hierarchical testing of the secondary endpoints will be
provided in the SAP.
5.3.7 Missing Data Processing
All efforts will be made to collect outcome data also in patients withdrawn from
the trial for whichever reasons and to minimize the amount of missing data.
Missing primary efficacy outcome values will be replaced using multiple
imputation technics. The model used to impute the missing values will be the
logistic regression model including the following covariates: allocated
treatment, baseline age (continuous), baseline NIHSS (continuous), vessel
occlusion location, and time from symptom onset to randomization
(continuous). A total of 5 multiply imputed datasets will be generated to get
the final treatment effect estimate and associated Cl.
Sensitivity analyses based on different hypotheses about the missingness
pattern of the primary outcome will be performed to test for the robustness of
the primary analysis. Details will be provided in the SAP of the study.
5.3.8 Safety Analyses
The original protocol specified that, the safety interim analyses will occur
when the first 100, 200, and 300 patients completed 90-day follow-up.
Mortality at 90 (+7) days is considered in the safety interim analysis. It was
conducted by the data safety monitoring board (DSMB). If there were
concerns about the safety of patients, this board were to make a
recommendation to the trial steering committee about continuing, stopping, or
modifying the trial.
Due to the fast speed of enrollment, after review with the DSMB in June 2025,
the original interim analysis plan no longer serves its purpose. On the
recommendation of the DSMB, the Steering Committee decided to rescind the
planned efficacy interim analysis and the third safety analysis. Since no formal
assessment of efficacy is done and no aloha is spent, we will not adjust the
alpha level or p values for the final analysis.

34

[PDF_PAGE 101]
Safety analyses will be performed on safety population. The safety evaluation

data include adverse events observed during the trial and changes in physical

examination, vial sign, electrocardiogram, imaging examination and laboratory

data before and after treatment. Adverse events will be summarized using

descriptive statistics. Chi-square test or Fisher exact test will be used to

compared the difference in the safety endpoints between the two treatment

arms. Descriptive statistics will be performed on laboratory safety indicators.

Safety endpoints, including proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours,

proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, and mortality at 90 (+7) days,

will be compared using the modified Poisson regression.

5.3.9 Subgroup Analysis

Subgroup analyses will be performed on a few important patient

characteristics and other variables of interest. The predefined subgroups

include:

@ Age (<65 years and 2 65 years);

@ Time from symptom onset to randomization (4.5-9 hours and 9-24 hours
and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and 2 10);

@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);

@ Occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA, M3-M4 segment of MCA, ACA, PCA
and stenosis);

@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and 2100 mg/dL);

@ Baseline systolic blood pressure ($140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).

6. Assessment of Safety

6.1 Definitions of AE and SAE

The definition of AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject

administered an investigational product. It can be a disease, worsening of

symptoms or signs, aggravation of concomitant diseases, effects of the

control drugs, which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the

35

[PDF_PAGE 102]
investigational product. According to the criteria of causality between drugs

and AEs, the correlation between AEs and application of the investigational

product is divided into 5 grades: definitely related, probably related, possibly

related, unlikely related, and definitely not related. An SAE is an untoward

medical occurrence (whether considered to be related to investigational

product or not) that is fatal or life-threatening, requires or prolongs

hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity,

constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect, requires intervention to

prevent permanent impairment or damage or is an important medical event.

6.1.1 Examples of an AE

@ Abnormal laboratory values (e.g. hematology, biochemistry, or urinalysis)
or other clinical tests (e.g. ECG, radiology, vital signs). Including
deteriorations from baseline and those medically significant in the opinion
of investigators (unrelated to the progression of concomitant disease). If
an abnormal laboratory value is a manifestation of one specific disease or
syndrome, the diagnosis should be recorded in the AE eCRF. If abnormal
laboratory findings are related to the same cause, these findings should
not be recorded repeatedly. The initial severity of the event should be
recorded, and the severity should be updated if the condition worsens.
Generally, abnormal laboratory values and clinical tests include:

- Presence of concurrent signs or symptoms, or

- Requiring active medical intervention, or

- Resulting in treatment interruption or discontinuation, or

- Requiring close monitoring, more frequent follow-up, or further clinical
evaluations.

@ Exacerbation of a chronic or intermittent of pre-existing condition,
including increased attack frequency and /or severity

@ New conditions detected or diagnosed after investigational product
administration even though it may have been present prior to the start of

36

[PDF_PAGE 103]
the study
@ Any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom, or disease suspected to
indicate drug-drug interactions
6.1.2 Events not Meeting the AE Definition
@ = Any clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings or other abnormal
safety assessments which are associated with the underlying disease
@ Medical or surgical procedures (e.g., endoscopy, appendectomy); the
medical condition leading to the procedure is an AE
@ Hospitalization for social or convenience reasons not for medical reasons
@ Pre-existing condition, anticipated day-to-day fluctuations of pre-existing
conditions
@ Pre-existing condition, sign or symptom not related to the study treatment
prior to the first administration of investigational product
6.1.3 Examples of an SAE
@ Results in death
All death during this study must be reported as SAE.
@ = |s life threatening
Note: The term “life-threatening” in the definition of “serious” refers to an event
in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not
refer to an event, which hypothetically might have caused death if it were
more severe.
@ Requires hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization
Note: In general, hospitalization signifies that the subject has been detained
(usually involving at least an overnight stay) at the hospital or emergency
ward for observation and/or treatment that would not have been appropriate in
the physician’s office or out-patient setting. Complications that occur during
hospitalization are AEs. If a complication prolongs hospitalization or fulfils any
other serious criteria, the event is serious. When in doubt as to whether
‘hospitalization’ occurred or was necessary, the AE should be considered
37

[PDF_PAGE 104]
serious. Hospitalization for elective treatment of a pre-existing condition that
did not worsen from baseline is not considered as an AE.
@ Results in disability/incapacity
Note: The term disability means a substantial disruption of a person's ability to
conduct normal life functions. This definition is not intended to include
experiences of relatively minor medical significance such as uncomplicated
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, and accidental trauma (e.g.
sprained ankle) which may interfere or prevent everyday life functions, but do
not constitute a substantial disruption.
@ Is acongenital abnormality/birth defect or
@ Isa significant medical event
Note: Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding
whether reporting is appropriate in other situations, such as important medical
events that may not be immediately life-threatening or result in death or
hospitalization, but may jeopardize the subject or may require medical or
surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the above
definition. These should also be considered serious. Examples of such events
are invasive or malignant cancers, intensive treatment in an emergency room
or at home for allergic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do
not result in hospitalization, or development of drug dependency or abuse.
If uncertainty exists in determining whether an event qualifies as an SAE, the
investigator should discuss with the sponsor and ethics committee.
6.1.4 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR)
SUSAR is an unexpected SAE of which the nature or severity is not
consistent with the reference documents, including investigator’s brochure
(IB), or the summary of product characteristics for an authorized medicinal
product.
6.2 AE and SAE Reporting Period
After randomization, all AEs/SAEs will be reported until 90 (+7) days.

38

[PDF_PAGE 105]
Investigators are not required to collect AEs/SAEs after study completion. The
sponsor should be notified if the investigator becomes aware of any SAE that
occurs after the end of the AE reporting period, if the event is believed to be
related to prior study drug treatment.
6.3 Follow-up of AE/SAE
After initial report of AE/SAE, the investigator should follow each event during
subsequent visits to gather additional information. All SAEs, as well as AEs
deemed related to the study drug or leading to discontinuation of treatment,
should be followed until the event has resolved to baseline grade or better,
the event is assessed as stable by the investigator, the patient is lost to
follow-up, or death occurs. The investigators are responsible for conducting
follow-up visits medically necessary or in accordance with the sponsor to
clarify the causality of AEs/SAEs.
Follow-up information of AEs should be updated on the AE eCRF, printed and
re-signed by the investigator. Alternatively, updated information may be
documented directly on the original paper CRF with a renewed signature and
date. Any modifications should be made by crossing out the original record
with double lines, annotating the changes, and signing/dating alongside. The
timelines and procedures for SAE follow-up reports align with those of the
initial report.
6.4 Recording and Severity Categorization of AE and SAE
6.4.1 Recording of AE/SAE
When an AE/SAE occurs, it is the responsibility of the investigator to review
all documentation (e.g. hospital progress notes, laboratory, and diagnostic
reports) relative to the event. The investigator will then record all relevant
information regarding an AE/SAE into the eCRF. The investigator will attempt
to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, symptoms, and/or other
clinical information. In the absence of a diagnosis, the individual
signs/symptoms should be documented.

39

[PDF_PAGE 106]
For each AE/SAE, the following information should be recorded: the term,
start and stop dates, outcome, severity, concurrent medical conditions,
concomitant medications, description, causality assessment, actinons taken
due to AE.

6.4.2 Severity Categorization

The severity of AEs is evaluated based on Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0 by the National Cancer Institute (NCI),
in conjunction with a comprehensive assessment of the patient's clinical
condition. If an AE is not listed in the NCI-CTCAE, the following criteria should
be applied to grade its severity:

Grade 1 (Mild) Asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or
diagnostic observations only; intervention not
indicated.

Grade 2 (Moderate) | Minimal, local, or noninvasive intervention indicated;
limiting age-appropriate instrumental activities of
daily living (e.g. preparing meals, shopping, using the
telephone).

Grade 3 (Severe) Medically significant but not immediately life-
threatening; hospitalization or prolongation of
hospitalization indicated; limiting self-care activities of
daily living (e.g. bathing, dressing, feeding).

Grade 4 (Life- Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention

threatening) indicated.

6.4.3 Assessment of Causality of AE and SAE
Causality assessment is one of the criteria for regulatory reporting
requirements. Investigators are responsible for evaluating whether an AE is
considered to be related to the study drug. The following guidance should be
taken into consideration after reviewing IB or product information:

40

[PDF_PAGE 107]
@ Temporal relationship of event onset to the initiation of study drug

@ Course of the event, with special consideration of the effect of dose
reduction, discontinuation of study drug, or reintroduction of study drug

@ Relationship to symptoms and signs and mechanism of action or
metabolic components of the study drug

@ Relationship of symptoms/signs alleviation or improvement to dose
reduction, without other targeted interventions for the AE

@ Relationship of symptoms/signs recurring or worsening to re-
administration of the study drug

@ Relationship of event occurrence to the concomitant conditions,
medications or other etiologies

@ Laboratory findings or clinical tests supporting a causal relationship

@ Known association in domestic or international literature

According to the criteria of causality, the correlation between AEs and the

application of study drug is divided into five grades: definitely related, probably

related, possibly related, unlikely related, and definitely not related.

The investigators are responsible to document, review, provide a causality

assessment (even with limited information at the time of SAE reporting), and

update information based on follow-up.

When further evaluating the criteria for a SUSAR, those with a causality

assessment of “unlikely related” shall be classified as “unrelated” in the binary

classification system.

6.5 Reporting Requirements of SAE

While SAEs are recorded in the eCRF, special reporting requirements apply

for the reporting of SAEs. The investigator shall notify within 24 hours the

sponsor of any SAE that occurs in a subject at a trial site. The investigator

shall properly retain written confirmation of the submission of all SAE reports

as evidence that each SAE has been appropriately reported.

The sponsor will comply with the requirements for post-marketing investigator-

a

[PDF_PAGE 108]
initiated interventional studies and report safety information related to study
drug to the regulatory authorities, the Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC), the
Clinical trial site, and the investigators involved in this study. The investigator
will review the Investigator Safety Reports received from the sponsor, which
describe SUSARs or other specific safety information, and then file them
together with the IB and notify the Ethics Committee. The sponsor will
promptly investigate any SAEs that occur in collaboration with the investigator
and take necessary measures to ensure the safety and rights of the
participants.
6.6 Reporting SAE to the Sponsor
Once an investigator becomes aware that an SAE has occurred, he/she will
immediately notify the sponsor within 24 hours. Any additional information
known after the event has been initially reported should be updated within 24
hours.
The investigator must complete, sign and date the SAE Form and verify the
accuracy of the information recorded on the form with the corresponding
source documents. A scanned copy of SAE Form will be sent to the sponsor
within 24 hours.
6.7 Management of Patients Who Experience AE
1) Contingency plan for bleeding events
To prevent bleeding events, patients should be enrolled in strict evaluation
with the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study protocol, to exclude
subjects with potentially high risk of bleeding. During intravenous
thrombolysis, close attention should be paid to the patient’s changes of
symptoms and signs in order to detect bleeding events in time. The
management of bleeding events should follow the clinical routine of the
hospital and be based on the clinical judgement, which may refer to the
following measures:
(@ If the patient has neurological symptoms and/or abnormal signs within 24
42

[PDF_PAGE 109]
hours after the start of treatment, intracranial hemorrhage should be

suspected, and the thrombolytic, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant drugs being

used should discontinued, and imaging examination should be performed
immediately to confirm the site of bleeding.

@) If intracranial hemorrhage or other clinically evident hemorrhage (e.g.

hematemesis, melena, hemoptysis) is confirmed, it is recommended to take

the following measures:

- Discontinue thrombolysis, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant medications
completely.

- Consult relevant specialists to jointly determine the appropriate treatment
plan.

- Monitor vital signs closely and manage related complications promptly.

- Transfuse fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate as needed.

-  Antifibrinolytic drugs such as aminocaproic acid may be administered
within 24 hours after thrombolysis to counteract its effects.

- Blood transfusion may be necessary to correct hemodynamic
abnormalities (hypotension) or anemia, with transfusion indications
determined based on clinical judgment. While carefully considering
transfusion indications, physicians should also pay attention to the adverse
effects of severe anemia on acute cerebral infarction.

- Assess the feasibility of surgical intervention if necessary.

@) Minor bleeding such as skin or mucous membrane bleeding, epistaxis,

gingival bleeding, microscopic hematuria, and positive fecal occult blood may

be treated symptomatically first. Whether to continue thrombolysis,
antiplatelet, and anticoagulant therapy or not will be decided according to the
severity of the bleeding.

2) Contingency plan for sICH

The incidence of sICH in our study is estimated 1-5%, and the vast majority of

sICH occurs within 24 hours after thrombolysis. It is characterized by sudden

changes in consciousness, single or multiple focal neurological deficits, coma,

[PDF_PAGE 110]
headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, hypertensive emergencies, and rapid

death in some cases. Once it occurs, active measure should be taken:

- Discontinue thrombolysis, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant treatment
immediately.

- Perform imaging examinations (emergency CT or MRI) to determine the
location, extent, and type of intracranial hemorrhage.

- Measure hematocrit, hemoglobin, prothrombin time, activated partial
thromboplastin time, platelet count, fibrinogen, D-dimer, and perform blood
typing test and cross-matching.

- Reduce intracranial pressure, including appropriate blood pressure control,
elevating the head of the bed by 30 degrees, intravenous mannitol
infusion, endotracheal intubation, assisted ventilation, and, if necessary,
surgical hematoma evacuation, decompressive craniectomy, and
ventricular catheter drainage.

- Use reversal agents for thrombolysis, antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents
if necessary: administer 2 units of fresh frozen plasma every 6 hours for 24
hours, recommend using protamine sulfate to neutralize unfractionated
heparin (1 mg of protamine sulfate neutralizes 100 U of unfractionated
heparin) for patients who have received unfractionated heparin within the
last 4 hours, and transfuse 6-8 unites of platelets if bleeding time is
abnormal.

3) Allergic reactions

No allergic reactions have been seen in clinical trials of this product in patients

following its use. In the event of any allergic reaction, anti-allergic treatment

needs to be done.

4) Other adverse events

The relationship between other adverse events and rhTNK-tPA is not clear,

and most of them are potential co-morbidities. These should be analyzed by

the investigator according to the specific situation and treated symptomatically
according to the corresponding treatment guidelines or clinical routines.

[PDF_PAGE 111]
7. Ethical Considerations
7.1 Informed Consent
The trial will not start in any site before written approval and authorization by
the respective Ethics Committee and Regulatory Authority. Any subsequent
protocol amendment will be submitted to the Ethics Committees for approval.
If deviations from or modifications to the study protocol are implemented
during the study to eliminate immediate risks to participants, they may be
enacted immediately but should be promptly reported to the Ethics
Committee.
Before recruitment and enrolment into the study, each prospective candidate
(or authorized representative where this is applicable) will be given a full
explanation of the nature, purpose, procedures, benefits, potential risks,
compensation for injury. The subjects or their representatives will be asked to
give consent to participate in the study by signing the informed consent form.
The consent forms shall be signed and dated by the appropriate parties. The
informed consent forms should indicate the version and date. A copy of
signed informed consent shall be provided to the subject or their
representatives.
The informed consent process should uphold the dignity and autonomy of
participants at every stage, ensuring respect for their right to self-
determination. Neither the investigator nor the trial staff(s) should coerce, lure,
or unduly influence subject to participate or to continue participating in the
trial. Participants are allowed to withdraw from the study at any time
unconditionally. The investigator will introduce the study drug to the subjects,
as well as the procedures; all relevant events will be reported to the
participants so that they can decide whether to continue participating.
7.2 Benefits and Risks of the Study
7.2.1 Potential Benefit and Risk in Interventional Arm
Previous meta-analyses and systematic reviews have found that for acute

45

[PDF_PAGE 112]
non-LVO ischemic stroke patients in extended time window with salvageable
brain tissue as identified by perfusion imaging, intravenous thrombolysis has
superior clinical efficacy compared to placebo, although there is a lack of data
assessing the risk of hemorrhage. Studies have shown that even if the
incidence of intracranial hemorrhage in the intravenous thrombolysis group is
higher than that in the placebo group, it does not alter the overall net benefit
of intravenous thrombolysis. Additionally, rhTNK-tPA has a half-life four times
longer than rt-PA, allowing for a single intravenous bolus administration.
Previous studies have indicated that rhnTNK-tPA has a tendency to improve
neurological outcomes compared to rt-PA. In summary, while individuals
cannot be guaranteed direct benefits from thrombolytic treatment by
participating in the study, the implementation may provide an opportunity for
patients with salvageable brain tissue but with an onset time of more than 4.5
hours to receive intravenous thrombolysis. This is conducive to enhancing
public awareness of reperfusion therapy and may benefit the general
population in the future.
7.2.2 Potential Benefit and Risk in Control Arm
Participants assigned to the control arm will receive standard medical
treatment with antiplatelet therapy. Due to variations in follow-up strategies
across different hospitals in clinical practice, patients enrolled may undergo
follow-up imaging or neurological examinations (such as 24-hour perfusion
imaging, 90-day mRS score) more frequently compared to those not enrolled.
The risks associated with these imaging and neurological function tests are
negligible, and participants may potentially benefit from these additional
follow-ups or examinations.
7.2.3 Risk-benefit Ratio
The objective of the study is to test efficacy and safety of intravenous rhTNK-
tPA in patients presenting within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have
anon-LVO and evidence of salvageable tissue on their baseline CTP. Several
46

[PDF_PAGE 113]
previous studies on perfusion imaging-guided intravenous thrombolysis
beyond 4.5 hours were prematurely terminated due to slow recruitment and
clinical guidelines updates. Although a meta-analysis suggests potential
benefits of intravenous thrombolysis, results across studies remain
inconsistent. Furthermore, prior research primarily compared intravenous
thrombolytic agents against placebo rather than using antiplatelet therapy as
an active control, leaving the comparative efficacy and safety of thrombolysis
versus antiplatelet treatment unresolved. Consequently, this study is critical to
delineate the efficacy and safety of rhTNK-tPA compared to antiplatelet
therapy in acute non-LVO stroke patients based on perfusion imaging within
4.5-24 hours of symptom onset. The results will widen the time window for
intravenous thrombolysis. A positive result from this trial would yield
substantial societal benefits, significantly outweighing the limited potential
risks in the study. Conversely, a negative result would spare this population
from ineffective interventions, conserving healthcare resources and averting
unnecessary risks.
7.3 Confidentiality
Personal data will be processed solely for evaluating the efficacy, safety,
quality and usage of the study drugs. Adequate procedures will be
implemented to ensure data security and confidentiality in accordance with
the relevant national laws and legislation. Technical safeguards will be applied
to protect person-identifiable data against unauthorized disclosure, access,
accidental or unlawful destruction, unintended loss or alteration. The sponsor
\with access to data are obligated to maintain the confidentiality of patient
identities.
The sponsor guarantees that the personal data will:
- Be processed in accordance with laws;
- Becollected only for the study objectives specified in the protocol and not

further processed for other purposes;

47

[PDF_PAGE 114]
- Be adequate, relevant, and not excessive to support the study objectives
- Be accurate and, where necessary, kept updated
Before collecting personal data, investigators will obtain consent from subjects
or their representatives for data processing, and direct access to original
medical records for related monitoring, auditing, ethics committee review, and
inspections.
Participants have the right to request access to their personal data held by the
investigator and to demand corrections to any inaccurate or incomplete
information. Reasonable actions will be taken, taking into account the nature
of the request, study conditions, and prevailing legal requirements.
7.4 Study Discontinuation or Withdraw Criteria
7.4.1 Discontinuation of Individual Patients
The treatment with the study drug should be terminated immediately in case
of any AE, abnormal laboratory findings, or other conditions that in the
investigators’ opinion, continuation of the study drug would be detrimental.
7.4.2 Withdrawal Criteria of Individual Patients
@ Patients have the right to voluntarily withdraw consent at any time for any
reason.
@ Poor compliance or incomplete information on the clinical or imaging
assessment.
@ Patients meet the criteria for discontinuation of study drug administration.
@ Loss to follow-up if patients cannot be contacted after at least three
consecutive documented attempts.
Every effort will be made to reduce unnecessary participant withdrawal.
7.4.3 Study Discontinuation
The sponsor has the right to halt or terminate the study at single center or all
centers. Reasons for terminating the study may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
@ Severe safety events occur in this study.
48

[PDF_PAGE 115]
@ The study drug demonstrates poor efficacy, lack of therapeutic effect, or
absence of clinical value.

@ Major errors are found in the protocol (including evaluation criteria,
operations) that make it difficult to evaluate the drug effect; or a well-
designed protocol is implemented with major deviations, making it difficult
to evaluate the drug effect.

@ The sponsor or regulatory authority decides to discontinue the study.

If the study is halted or terminated due to safety concerns, the sponsor should

notify all investigators immediately and report the reasons to regulatory

authorities. In accordance with local laws and regulations, the investigators
should promptly inform the IEC with a detailed explanation. The investigators
should notify participants and ensure their appropriate medical care and
follow-up visits.

The halted study may resume only after address the concerns related to

safety, protocol compliance, data quality, and upon obtaining approval from

the sponsor, Ethic Committees, and regulatory authorities.

7.4.4 Management of Patients Discontinuation or Withdrawal

If a patient discontinues or withdraws, the reason(s) for

discontinuation/withdrawal must be documented in both the source medical

records and eCRF. If multiple reasons exist, the primary reason should be
specified. All unused study drugs should be accounted for and returned. In
cases of lost-to-follow-up, the investigator will make every effort to re-
establish contact with the patient (e.g., via telephone, email/mail, or contacting
relatives/friends based on registered information).

8. Study Management and Monitoring

8.1 Protocol Amendments

The protocol will not be modified by the investigator or the sponsor without

first obtaining the agreement of the other in writing. Any change agreed upon

will be recorded in writing, the written amendment will be signed by the
49

[PDF_PAGE 116]
investigator, the signed amendment will be appended to this study. All

protocol amendments had to be published by the sponsor. Any protocol

amendments will be submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB)/ IEC

and to regulatory authorities in accordance with local regulatory requirements.

Approval must be obtained from the IRB/IEC and regulatory authorities before

implementation of any changes, except for changes necessary to eliminate an

immediate hazard to participants only.

8.2 Quality Control

8.2.1 Study Monitoring of the Sponsor

- Acomprehensive study quality management system shall be established to

comprehensively optimize the process management of the study, including

trial design, implementation, documentation, outcome evaluation, reporting,

and archival of records.

- Quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) methodologies shall be

tailored to align with the potential risk of the trial and the criticality of the data.

- Qualified investigational centers will be selected to conduct this study. The

sponsor will collaborate with centers to initiate the study in accordance with

regulatory requirements, the approved protocol after receiving ethic

committee approval.

- A dedicated research and management team will be established to oversee

and supervise the study execution. Timely communication will be maintained.

During inspections by the drug regulatory authorities, representatives from

both the research and management teams shall be present.

- The study will be processed in accordance with the GCP, protocol, and

relevant national and international legislation.

- No alterations to trial data are permitted in any form.

- The sponsor will deploy Clinical Research Associates to each participating

center for regular site monitoring visits to verify proper collection of informed

consents, accessibility of source data, accuracy and completeness of eCRF,
50

[PDF_PAGE 117]
accountability and dispensing of study drugs, occurrence and records of AEs.
- If necessary, the sponsor can appoint an independent auditor to further
ensure the quality.
8.2.2 Study Monitoring of the Sites
- Faculty and investigators should avoid actual or apparent conflicts of
interest.
- Before the initiation of the study, site investigators should receive training on
the trial protocol and gain a thorough understanding of its implementation as
well as the significance of all relevant endpoints.
- The principal investigator (PI) of each site is responsible for supervising the
staff to strictly implement the study.
- Clinical trials infrastructure should be developed in each study site providing
research support and management.
- All investigational site staff should have provided appropriate and current
evidence that they are qualified by education. The site Pls have sufficient time
to properly conduct and complete the trail within the specific period and
ensure that the data generated are reliable. Where a satellite site requires the
service of a third-party provider, the consent of the sponsor should be
obtained.
- Site staff should describe how the study procedures will be undertaken face-
to-face to patients and monitor the patients’ medication adherence.
- Investigators should strictly follow the study protocol and procedures. The
study drugs are forbidden to use for non-experimental purpose. Study related
documentation including AEs/SAEs should be recorded and maintained.
- During the trial implementation, it is preferable for the same investigator to
evaluate all observation endpoints for the same patient to minimize subjective
bias.
- When an AE/SAE occurs, site staff should provide appropriate treatment to
protect the rights and welfare of subjects.

51

[PDF_PAGE 118]
- The site Pls have ultimate responsibility for the content of the eCRF but may

delegate the task to suitably qualified individuals. The Pls should, however,

maintain oversight of the quality of the data provided to the sponsor.

- Site staff should take active measure to control the drop-out rate within an

acceptable range.

- The QC personnel conduct a thorough assessment of the site’s readiness

prior to study initiation. Through the implementation and upon the study

completion, QC personnel will perform systematic reviews of source

documentation and ensure its proper archiving. The QA personnel should

conduct independent audits of the trail process. In the event of non-

conformities, QA personnel should promptly notify the investigators, ensuring

timely corrections are implemented and verified for effectiveness, where

applicable.

8.2.3 Site Inspections

Site visits will be conducted by the sponsor or an authorized representative for

inspection of study data, patients’ medical records, and eCRFs. A written

report must be prepared after each monitoring visit. Monitors shall promptly

follow up on any issues or questions identified during monitoring, assist

investigators in resolving them, and accurately document the resolution

process.

9. Organizational Structure

9.1 Trials Boards and Committees

9.1.1 Steering Committee

- Provide scientific and strategic guidance for the trial and assume full

responsibility for the design, execution, and publication of the trial.

- Ensure the quality of the research and its implementation and management.

- Approve the trial protocol and operational guidelines prior to the initiation of

the trial.

- Hold regular teleconferences or face-to-face meetings to discuss and report
52

[PDF_PAGE 119]
on the progress of the trial.

- Describe the composition and responsibilities in the charter, with the final

form confirmed before the trial begins.

9.1.2 Executive Committee

The executive committee of this study will decide on the final protocol and

oversee the trial.

9.1.3 Data Safety and Monitoring Board

The DSMB will regularly monitor the safety of the trial and guarantee the

safety of patients at all stages of OPTION. The members of the DSMB are not

participants of the OPTION consortium and not involved in the clinical trial in

any other way. DSMB members will be qualified by DSMB and the steering

committee before the study initiation, including the certification, roles, and

responsibilities. A report will be submitted to the chief of the committee once a

DSMB meeting is finished. The DSMB may at any time recommend an

amendment to the clinical trial protocol or termination of the trial in case of

safety concerns.

9.1.4 Clinical Events Committee

Safety endpoints and SAEs will be reviewed by Clinical Events Committee

(CEC). The charter of CEC will be approved by the committee and the

steering committee before the study initiation.

9.1.5 Imaging Core Laboratory

The objectives of the imaging core laboratory (ICL) are to provide an unbiased

assessment of several imaging measures. They are knowledgeable in the

analysis of neuroradiological images and will be blinded, i.e. unaware of the

patient's treatment allocation and trial outcome. The ICL will receive coded

imaging data only. ICL results will overrule site/investigator assessments

probably.

9.2 Site Training and Certification

The steering committee will provide training to participating sites in GCP and
53

[PDF_PAGE 120]
in some outcome assessments (e.g., NIHSS, mRS, etc.). Prior to initiation of

enrollment, site Pls and coordinators must complete all training programs.

The training programs that need to be completed are as follows:

- Study procedures

- OPTION eligibility criteria

- mRS

- NIHSS

- GCS

- EQ-5D-5L

- CTPDoc (Shukun, Beijing, China)

- TOAST classification

- Heidelberg bleeding classification

- Collecting DICOM imaging data

The training program must be completed before a site begins to initiate the

trial. Pl and key research members at each site will regularly participate in

teleconferences to address issues during the study.

A detailed IB will serve as the primary document describing all study related

procedures. Members of steering committee and research coordinators will

maintain communication with site investigators via telephone, Wechat, or

email to resolve issues encountered during the study running.

The steering committee will manage and conduct site visits to ensure the

integrity and validity of the data in eCRF. During the trial, each site should be

visited at least once. If there are problems with data quality or recruitment,

sites should be visited as needed.

10. Study Report and Publications

10.1 Study Registration and Results

The trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/) before the

start and updated as appropriate according to the protocol amendments or

study progress. When the study is completed, the study representatives will
54

[PDF_PAGE 121]
register the study result without delay.
10.2 Publication of Results
Upon study completion, the research database will be closed within one
month following the last scheduled follow-up date. Study representatives shall
implement necessary measures (e.g., preventing identification of individual
study patients) to protect human rights or the rights and interests of patients
and relevant parties. Manuscripts will be submitted to leading clinical journals
within three months after database closure.
The draft manuscript will be shared with the sponsor one month prior to
submission; however, the sponsor shall not influence its content. Authorship
will be determined by study representatives in accordance with the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE)
Recommendations for the Conduct, Reporting, Editing and Publication of
Scholarly Work in Medical Journals (http://www.icmije.orq). All authors must
review and approve the manuscript details prior to submission. This
authorship policy equally applies to conference presentations.
11. Funding and Conflict of Interest
OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funders are Beijing Hospitals
Authority Clinical Medicine Development of special funding support
(ZLRK202514) and CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD.
The investigators have no conflicts of interest with the sponsor. No potential
conflicts of interest that might influence the study outcome or protocol
development exist during study design, conduct, statistical analysis, or
reporting of the results.
12. References
1. Turc G, Bhogal P, Fischer U, et al. European Stroke Organisation (ESO)- European
Society for Minimally Invasive Neurological Therapy (ESMINT) guidelines on mechanical
thrombectomy in acute ischemic stroke. J Neurointerv Surg. Jun 2019;11(6):535-538.
doi:10.1136/neurintsurg-2018-014568

55

[PDF_PAGE 122]
2. Smith EE, Kent DM, Bulsara KR, et al. Accuracy of Prediction Instruments for
Diagnosing Large Vessel Occlusion in Individuals With Suspected Stroke: A Systematic
Review for the 2018 Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients With Acute
Ischemic Stroke. Stroke. Mar 2018;49(3):e111-e122. doi:10.1161/str.0000000000000160
3. Nogueira RG, Jadhav AP, Haussen DC, et al. Thrombectomy 6 to 24 Hours after
Stroke with a Mismatch between Deficit and Infarct. N Engl J Med. Jan 4 2018;378(1):11-
21. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1706442
4. Albers GW, Marks MP, Kemp S, et al. Thrombectomy for Stroke at 6 to 16 Hours
with Selection by Perfusion Imaging. N Eng/ J Med. Feb 22 2018;378(8):708-718.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1713973
5. Powers WJ, Rabinstein AA, Ackerson T, et al. Guidelines for the Early
Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: 2019 Update to the 2018
Guidelines for the Early Management of Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Guideline for
Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. Dec 2019;50(12):e344-e418. doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000211
6. Olthuis SGH, Pirson FAV, Pinckaers FME, et al. Endovascular treatment versus no
endovascular treatment after 6-24 h in patients with ischaemic stroke and collateral flow
on CT angiography (MR CLEAN-LATE) in the Netherlands: a multicentre, open-label,
blinded-endpoint, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. Apr 22
2023;401(10385):1371-1380. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(23)00575-5
7. Nguyen TN, Nogueira RG, Qureshi MM, et al. Noncontrast CT Selected
Thrombectomy vs Medical Management for Late-Window Anterior Large Vessel
Occlusion. Neurology. May 28 2024;102(10):e209324.
doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000209324
8. Tao C, Nogueira RG, Zhu Y, et al. Trial of Endovascular Treatment of Acute
Basilar-Artery Occlusion. N Engl J Med. Oct 13 2022;387(15):1361-1372.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2206317
9. Jovin TG, LiC, Wu L, et al. Trial of Thrombectomy 6 to 24 Hours after Stroke Due
to Basilar-Artery Occlusion. N Engl J Med. Oct 13 2022;387(15):1373-1384.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2207576

56

[PDF_PAGE 123]
10. Ospel JM, Nguyen TN, Jadhav AP, et al. Endovascular Treatment of Medium
Vessel Occlusion Stroke. Stroke. Mar 2024;55(3):769-778.
doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA. 123.036942
11. Berge E, Whiteley W, Audebert H, et al. European Stroke Organisation (ESO)
guidelines on intravenous thrombolysis for acute ischaemic stroke. Eur Stroke J. Mar
2021;6(1):I-LXII. doi:10.1177/2396987321989865
12. Goyal M, Ospel JM, Ganesh A, et al. Endovascular Treatment of Stroke Due to
Medium-Vessel Occlusion. N Engl J Med. Feb 5 2025;doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2411668
13. Psychogios M, Brehm A, Ribo M, et al. Endovascular Treatment for Stroke Due to
Occlusion of Medium or Distal Vessels. N Engl J Med. Feb 5
2025;doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2408954.
14. Khaja AM, Grotta JC. Established treatments for acute ischaemic stroke. Lancet.
Jan 27 2007;369(9558):319-30. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(07)60154-8
15. Darby DG, Barber PA, Gerraty RP, et al. Pathophysiological topography of acute
ischemia by combined diffusion-weighted and perfusion MRI. Stroke. Oct
1999;30(10):2043-52. doi:10.1161/01.str.30.10.2043
16. Markus R, Reutens DC, Kazui S, et al. Hypoxic tissue in ischaemic stroke:
persistence and clinical consequences of spontaneous survival. Brain. Jun 2004;127(Pt
6):1427-36. doi:10.1093/brain/awh162
17. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Parsons MW, et al. Association of Reperfusion After
Thrombolysis With Clinical Outcome Across the 4.5- to 9-Hours and Wake-up Stroke
Time Window: A Meta-Analysis of the EXTEND and EPITHET Randomized Clinical
Trials. JAMA Neurol. Feb 1 2021;78(2):236-240. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.4123
18. Tsivgoulis G, Katsanos AH, Malhotra K, et al. Thrombolysis for acute ischemic
stroke in the unwitnessed or extended therapeutic time window. Neurology. Mar 24
2020;94(12):e1241-e1248. doi:10.1212/wnl.0000000000008904
19. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Ringleb PA, et al. Extending thrombolysis to 4.5-9 h and
wake-up stroke using perfusion imaging: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Lancet. Jul 13 2019;394(10193):139-147. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(19)31053-0

57

[PDF_PAGE 124]
20. Davis SM, Donnan GA, Parsons MW, et al. Effects of alteplase beyond 3 h after
stroke in the Echoplanar Imaging Thrombolytic Evaluation Trial (EPITHET): a placebo-
controlled randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. Apr 2008;7(4):299-309. doi:10.1016/S1474-
4422(08)70044-9
21. Ringleb P, Bendszus M, Bluhmki E, et al. Extending the time window for
intravenous thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke using magnetic resonance imaging-
based patient selection. Int J Stroke. Jul 2019;14(5):483-490.
doi:10.1177/1747493019840938
22. Ma H, Campbell BCV, Parsons MW, et al. Thrombolysis Guided by Perfusion
Imaging up to 9 Hours after Onset of Stroke. N Engl J Med. May 9 2019;380(19):1795-
1803. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1813046
23. Kheiri B, Osman M, Abdalla A, et al. Tenecteplase versus alteplase for
management of acute ischemic stroke: a pairwise and network meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. J Thromb Thrombolysis. Nov 2018;46(4):440-450.
doi:10.1007/s11239-018-1721-3
24. Katsanos AH, Psychogios K, Turc G, et al. Off-Label Use of Tenecteplase for the
Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA
Netw Open. Mar 1 2022;5(3):e224506. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.4506
25. Katsanos AH, Safouris A, Sarraj A, et al. Intravenous Thrombolysis With
Tenecteplase in Patients With Large Vessel Occlusions: Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Stroke. Jan 2021;52(1):308-312. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.030220
26. Burgos AM, Saver JL. Evidence that Tenecteplase Is Noninferior to Alteplase for
Acute Ischemic Stroke: Meta-Analysis of 5 Randomized Trials. Stroke. Aug
2019;50(8):2156-2162. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.119.025080
27. Huang X, Maclsaac R, Thompson JL, et al. Tenecteplase versus alteplase in stroke
thrombolysis: An individual patient data meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int
J Stroke. Jul 2016;11(5):534-43. doi:10.1177/1747493016641112
28. Chinese Society of Neurology, Chinese Stroke Society. Chinese guidelines for
diagnosis and treatment of acute ischemic stroke 2023. Chinese Journal of Neurology,
Jun 2024;57(6):523-559. doi:10.3760/cma.j.cn1 13694-20240410-00221.

58

[PDF_PAGE 125]
29. Chinese Society of Neurology, Chinese Stroke Society. Chinese guideline for the
secondary prevention of ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack 2022. Chinese
Journal of Neurology, Oct 2022;55(10):1071-1110.doi:10.3760/cma.j.cn113694-
20220714-00548

59

[PDF_PAGE 126]
Appendix 1: modified Rankin Scale
(Seore[Osscnpton
[o_[Nosymptoms ata
1 No significant disability despite symptoms; able to carry out all usual duties
and activities
2 Slight disability; unbale to carry out all previous activities; but able to look
after own affairs without assistance
3 Moderate disability; requiring some help, but able to walk without
assistance
4 Moderately severe disability; unbale to walk without assistance and unable
to attend to own bodily needs without assistance
5 Severe disability; bedridden, incontinent and requiring constant nursing
care and attention
Ce
The modified Rankin Scale is used to measure the neurological recovery of patients
after stroke. The official definitions of each category are shown below in bold and the
italicized text provides guidance that may reduce inter-observer variability, without
requiring a structured interview. Note that only symptoms arising since the stroke
should be considered. Walking counts as independent provided it is not assisted by
another person (walking aids such as a cane are allowed).
If there is still some doubt between two adjacent alternatives on the scale, and both
options appear equally valid, then the worse option should be chosen.
0 No symptoms at all
The patient should be unaware of any new limitation of symptoms caused by the
stroke, however minor.
1 No significant disability despite symptoms; able to carry out all usual duties
and activities
The patient has some symptoms as a result of the stroke, whether physical or
cognitive
— for example affecting speech, reading, or writing; or physical movement; or
sensation; or vision; or swallowing; or mood — but can continue to take part in all
previous work, social and leisure activities. The crucial question to distinguish grade 1
from grade 2 (below) may be, ‘Is there anything that you can no longer do that you
used to do until you had the stroke?’ As a guide, an activity that was undertaken more
frequently than monthly could be regarded as a ‘usual activity’.
2 Slight disability; unable to carry out all previous activities, but able to look
after own affairs without assistance
The patient will be unable to undertake some activities that were possible before the
stroke (e.g. driving a car, dancing, reading, or working) but is still able to look after
himself/herself without help from others on a day-to-day basis. Thus, the patient can
60

[PDF_PAGE 127]
manage dressing, moving around, feeding, toileting, preparing simple meals,
shopping, and traveling locally without needing assistance from anyone else.
Supervision is not necessary. This grade assumes that the patient could be left alone
at home for periods of a week or more without concern.
3 Moderate disability; requiring some help, but able to walk without assistance
At this grade, the patient is independently mobile (using a walking aid of frame if
necessary) and can manage dressing, toileting, feeding, etc. but needs help from
someone else for more complex tasks. For example, someone else may need to
undertake shopping, cooking, or cleaning and will need to visit the patient more often
than weekly to ensure that these activities are completed. The assistance can be
advisory rather than physical: for example, a patient who needs supervision or
encouragement to cope with financial affairs would be in this grade.
4 Moderately severe disability; unable to walk and attend to bodily needs
without assistance
The patient requires someone else to help with some daily tasks, whether walking,
dressing, toileting, or eating. This patient will be visited at least once and usually twice
or more times daily, or must live in proximity to a carer. To distinguish grade 4 from
grade 5 (below), consider whether the patient can regularly be left alone for moderate
periods during the day.
5 Severe disability; bedridden, incontinent, and requiring constant nursing care
and attention
Someone else will always need to be available during the day and at times during the
night, though not necessarily a trained nurse.
6 Dead

61

[PDF_PAGE 128]
Appendix 2: National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
Administer stroke scale items in the order listed. Record performance in each category
after each subscale exam. Do not go back and change scores. Follow directions provided
for each exam technique. Scores should reflect what the patient does, not what the
clinical thinks the patient can do. The clinician should record answers while administering
the exam and work quickly. Expect where indicated, the patients should not be coached
(i.e. repeated requests to patients to make a special effort).
1a Level of Consciousness: 0= Alert; keenly responsive.
The investigator must choose a response if a full 1= Not alert; but arousable by minor stimulation to
evaluation is prevented by such obstacles as an obey, answer, or respond.
endotracheal tube, language 2= Not alert; requires repeated stimulation to
barrier, orotracheal trauma/bandages. A 3 is scored attend, or is obtunded and requires strong or painful
only if the patient makes no movement (other than stimulation to make movements (not stereotyped).
reflexive posturing) in response to noxious stimulation. | 3= Responds only with reflex motor or autonomic
effects, or totally unresponsive, flaccid, and
areflexic.
1b LOC Questions: ([t is important that only the initial | 0= Answers both questions correctly.
answer be graded and that the examiner not “help” 1= Answers one question correctly.
the patient with verbal or non-verbal cues.) 2= Answers neither question correctly.
The patient is asked the month and his/her age. The
answer must be correct - there is no partial credit for
being close. Aphasic and stuporous patients who do
not comprehend the questions will score 2. Patients
unable to speak because of endotracheal intubation,
orotracheal trauma, severe dysarthria from any cause,
language barrier, or any other problem not secondary
to aphasia are given a 1.
2 Best Gaze: 0= Normal.
Only horizontal eye movements will be tested. 1= Partial gaze palsy; gaze is abnormal in
Voluntary or reflexive (oculocephalic) eye movements _| one or both eyes, but forced deviation or total gaze
will be scored, but caloric testing is not done. If the paresis is not present.
patient has a conjugate deviation of the eyes that can 2= Forced deviation, or total gaze paresis
be overcome by voluntary or reflexive activity, the is not overcome by the oculocephalic
score will be 1. If a patient has an isolated peripheral maneuver.
nerve
paresis (CN Ill, IV, or VI), score a 1. Gaze is testable in
all aphasic patients. Patients with ocular trauma,
bandages, pre-existing blindness, or other disorder of
visual acuity or fields should be tested with reflexive
62

[PDF_PAGE 129]
movements, and a choice made by the investigator.
Establishing eye contact and then moving about the
patient from side to side will occasionally clarify the
presence of a partial gaze palsy.
3 Visual: 0= No visual loss.
Visual fields (upper and lower quadrants) are tested by | 1= Partial hemianopia.
confrontation, using finger counting or visual threat, as | 2= Complete hemianopia.
appropriate. Patients may be encouraged, but if they 3= Bilateral hemianopia (blind including
look at the side of the moving fingers appropriately, cortical blindness).
this can be scored
as normal. If there is unilateral blindness or
enucleation, visual fields in the remaining eye are
scored. Score 1 only if a clear-cut asymmetry,
including quadrantanopia, is found. If patient is blind
from any cause, score 3. Double simultaneous.
stimulation is performed at this point. If there is
extinction, patient receives a 1, and the results are
used to respond to item 11.
4 Facial Palsy: O= Normal symmetrical movements.
Ask - or use pantomime to encourage - the patient to 1= Minor paralysis (flattened nasolabial
show teeth or raise eyebrows and close eyes. Score fold, asymmetry on smiling).
symmetry of grimace in response to noxious stimuli in 2= Partial paralysis (total or near-total
the poorly responsive or non-comprehending patient. If | paralysis of lower face).
facial trauma/bandages, orotracheal tube, tape, or 3= Complete paralysis of one or both
other physical barriers obscure the face, these should sides (absence of facial movement in the
be removed to the extent possible. upper and lower face).
5 Motor Arm: O= No drift; limb holds 90 (or 45) degrees for full 10
The limb is placed in the appropriate position: extend seconds.
the arms (palms down) 90 degrees (if sitting) or 45 1= Drift; limb holds 90 (or 45) degrees, but drifts
degrees (if supine). down before full 10 seconds; does not hit bed or
Drift is scored if the arm falls before 10 seconds. The other support.
aphasic patient is encouraged using urgency in the 2= Some effort against gravity; limb cannot get to or
voice and pantomime, but not noxious stimulation. maintain (if cued) 90 (or 45) degrees, drifts down to
Each limb is tested in turn, beginning with the non- bed, but has some effort against gravity.
paretic arm. Only in the case of amputation or joint 3= No effort against gravity; limb falls.
fusion at the shoulder, the examiner should record the | 4= No movement.
score as untestable (UN) and clearly write the 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
explanation for this choice. 5a Left Arm
5b Right Arm
6 Motor Leg: 0= No drift; leg holds 30-degree position
The limb is placed in the appropriate position: hold the | for full 5 seconds.
leg at 30 degrees (always tested 1= Drift; leg falls by the end of the 5-
supine). Drift is scored if the leg falls before 5 seconds. | second period but does not hit the bed.
The aphasic patient is encouraged using urgency in 2= Some effort against gravity; leg falls
63

[PDF_PAGE 130]
the voice and pantomime but not noxious stimulation. to bed by 5 seconds, but has some effort
Each limb is tested in turn, beginning with the non- against gravity.
paretic leg. Only in the case of amputation or joint 3= No effort against gravity; leg falls to
fusion at the hip, the examiner should record the score | bed immediately.
as untestable (UN), and clearly write the explanation 4= No movement.
for this choice. 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
6a Left Leg
6b Right Leg
7 Limb Ataxia: O= Absent.
This item is aimed at finding evidence of a unilateral 1= Present in one limb.
cerebellar lesion. Test with eyes open. In case of 2= Present in two limbs.
visual defect, ensure testing is done in intact visual 9= UN=Amputation or joint fusion.
field. The finger-nose-finger and heel-shin tests are
performed on both sides, and ataxia is scored only if
present out of proportion to weakness. Ataxia is absent
in the patient who cannot understand or is paralyzed.
Only in the case of amputation or joint fusion, the
examiner should record the score as untestable (UN)
and clearly write the explanation for this choice. In
case of blindness, test by having the patient touch
nose from extended arm position.
8 Sensory: 1= Mild-to-moderate sensory loss; patient feels
Sensation or grimace to pinprick when tested, or pinprick is less sharp or is dull on the affected side;
withdrawal from noxious stimulus in the obtunded or or there is a loss of superficial pain with pinprick,
aphasic patient. Only sensory loss attributed to stroke but patient is aware of being touched.
is scored as abnormal and the examiner should test as | 2= Severe or total sensory loss; patient is not aware
many body areas [arms (not hands), legs, trunk, face] of being touched in the face, arm, and leg.
as needed to accurately check for hemisensory loss. A
score of 2, “severe or total sensory loss,” should only
be given when a severe or total loss of sensation can
be clearly demonstrated. Stuporous and aphasic
patients will, therefore, probably score 1 or 0. The
patient with brainstem stroke who has bilateral loss of
sensation is scored 2. If the patient does not respond
and is quadriplegic, score 2. Patients in a coma (item
1a = 3) are automatically given a 2 on this item.
9 Best Language: 0= No aphasia; normal.
A great deal of information about comprehension will 1= Mild-to-moderate aphasia; some obvious loss of
be obtained during the preceding sections of the fluency or facility of comprehension, without
examination. For this scale item, the patient is asked to | significant limitation on ideas expressed or form of
describe what is happening in the attached picture, to expression. Reduction of speech and/or
name the items on the attached naming sheet, and to comprehension, however, makes conversation
read from the attached list of sentences. about provided materials difficult or impossible. For
Comprehension is judged from responses here, as well | example, in conversation about provided materials,
64

[PDF_PAGE 131]
as to all of the commands in the preceding general examiner can identify picture or naming card

neurological exam. If visual loss interferes with the content from patient's response.

tests, ask the patient to identify objects placed in the 2= Severe aphasia; all communication is through

hand, repeat, and produce speech. The intubated fragmentary expression; great need for inference,

patient should be asked to write. questioning, and guessing by the listener. Range of

The patient in a coma (item 1a =3) will automatically information that can be exchanged is limited;

score 3 on this item. The examiner must choose a listener carries burden of communication. Examiner

score for the patient with stupor or limited cooperation, | cannot identify materials provided from patient

but a score of 3 should be used only if the patient is response.

mute and follows no one-step commands. 3=Mute, global aphasia; no usable speech or
auditory comprehension.

10 Dysarthria: O= Normal.

If patient is thought to be normal, an adequate sample | 1= Mild-to-moderate dysarthria; patient

of speech must be obtained by asking patient to read slurs at least some words and, at worst,

or repeat words from the attached list. If the patient can be understood with some difficulty.

has severe aphasia, the clarity of articulation of 2= Severe dysarthria; patient’s speech is

spontaneous speech can be rated. Only if the patient is | so slurred as to be unintelligible in the

intubated or has other physical barriers to producing absence of or out of proportion to any

speech, the examiner should record the score as dysphasia, or is mute/anarthric.

untestable (UN), and clearly write the explanation for 9= UN=Intubated or other physical

this choice. Do not tell the patient why he/she is being | barrier.

tested.

11 Extinction and Inattention (formerly Neglect): O= No abnormality.

Sufficient information to identify neglect may be 1= Visual, tactile, auditory, spatial, or

obtained during the prior testing. If the patient has a personal inattention, or extinction to

severe visual loss preventing visual double bilateral simultaneous stimulation in one

simultaneous stimulation, and the cutaneous stimuli of the sensory modalities.

are normal, the score is normal. If the patient has 2= Profound hemi-inattention or

aphasia but does appear to attend to both sides, the extinction to more than one modality;

score is normal. The presence of visual spatial neglect | does not recognize own hand or orients to

or anosagnosia may also be taken as evidence of only one side of space.

abnormality. Since the abnormality is scored only if

present, the item is never untestable.

ee

65

[PDF_PAGE 132]
LIL
ost le i
a 85 MS ASN
\7 aay :
Or a
N | 7 = V
Wee SE
NL NK SG
I7-) if
Aw sah
Please read the following words:
I know.
Go down the stairs.
Go back home and cook dinner.
Review at school.
Give an excellent speech.
66

[PDF_PAGE 133]
tie
Te
NW ew
» MY C <a
\ TAY }
ies l
K oF
‘yy 46s
Ze ji
1 . iy
\"
ay | Vas, Vin wll ) han,
Please read the following words:
Mom
Earth
Airplane Airplane
Silk
Start on time
Eat the grape and don’t spit grape skins
67

[PDF_PAGE 134]
Appendix 3: Glasgow Coma Scale
Assessment Measure Score
Eye opening (E) 4= Spontaneous
3= To sound
2= To pain
1= Never
Verbal response (V) 5= Oriented
4= Confused conversation
3= Inappropriate words
2= Incomprehensible sounds
1= None
Motor response (M) 6= Obeys command
5= Localises pain
4= Withdrawal flexion
3= Abnormal flexion
2= Extension
1= None
TOTAL seve lS.
(E+M+V)
NB. If the patient is intubated the verbal response should be scored 1.
When scoring the motor response, assess the response for the extremities of side
unaffected by partial or complete paralysis.
68

[PDF_PAGE 135]
Appendix 4: EuroQoL 5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire
Under each heading, please tick the ONE box that best describes your health TODAY.
MOBILITY
[Thave no probiensinwakingabowt ———SSCSCSCS~S~S~S~
[Ihave moderate problemsin waking about ———SSCSC~C~S~S~sCC
[Thave severe problemsin waking about ———~—SCSCSCS~S~
SELF-CARE
[have no probems washing ordressing mysa’ ————SSCSCS~S~—*d
[Thave sight problems washing or dressing nyse’ ———SSCSCSCSC*~
[Thave moderate problems washing or dessing nyse ————SSSSCd id
[Ihave severe problems washing or dressing nyse ————SSSC*dE =
[Tamunabietowashordressmyse SSS
USUAL ACTIVITIES (e.g. work, study, house work, family or leisure activities)
[Ihave no problems ding ny usvalacivtes Ed
[Thave sight problems doing my wsualacivies————SSCSCSCSCS~d
[Thave moderate problems doing my wsualaciviles—————SSSSS«d id
[Ihave severe problems doing my usualacives———SSCS~*~d=d
[Tam unabietodomyusualacivies————SSSSCSCS~
PAIN/DISCOMFORT
A
[Ihave sight painordscomfoR ———=SCSCSCSC~“~“~*~“~“~*~*~*~rSCSC*d
[Ihave moderate painordsconfor——=~SCSCSC~C~S~S
[Ihave severe pain ordscomfon SSS
[Ihave extemepainordscomfok——=SCSCSC~C~“~“~*~“~*~*~rSSC*d
ANXIETY/DEPRESSION
[1amnotanxious ordepressed
[am sighty enous ordepressed SSCS
[Tam moderately anious ordepressed ——=SCSCSC~*~*~“~*~*~“~*~*~wSCSC*d
[1am severe anvous ordepressed ——SSSSSCSC~S~S~S id
a
69

[PDF_PAGE 136]
@ We would like to know how good or bad your health is TODAY
@ = This scale is numbered from 0 to 100.
@ 100 means the best health you can imagine.
O means the worst health you can imagine.
@ = Mark an X on the scale to indicate how your health is TODAY.
@ Now, please write the number you marked on the scale in the box below.
‘The best health
you can imagine
100
95
90
85
80
5
70
65
60
5S
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
5
10
5
o
you can mopne
YOUR HEALTH TODAY=
70

[PDF_PAGE 137]
Protocol amendments between version 1.2 (December 24", 2022) to version 1.3 (April 13", 2023)
Notes: Parts moved will be marked as “This part was moved to...”

Revisions V2 Vvi3

(Location) December 24" 2022 April 13% 2023

Version Number/Date | Protocol Version: Version 1.2, December 24, 2022 Protocol Version: Version 1.3, April 13, 2023

(Front Page)

Funding Major Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China | CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD
(82090043); CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD

Exclusion criteria | @ — Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours © Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or

(Protocol Synopsis) intention to receive intravenous thrombolysis
© — Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to be >1/3

MCA territory © Remove
3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria | @ — Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours © Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or
intention to receive intravenous thrombolysis
© — Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to be >1/3
MCA territory @ Remove

3.3.1 Randomization | Eligible patients are randomized to treatment with either rhTNK-tPA | Eligible patients are randomized to treatment with either rhTNK-
or standard medical treatment with a ratio of 1:1, Randomization uses | tPA or standard medical treatment with a ratio of 1:1.
a minimization process to balance the numbers of patients across the | Randomization uses a minimization process to balance the
two arms with respect to age (<65 or >65 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 | numbers of patients across the two arms with respect to vessel
or 216) and center occlusion location (anterior or posterior circulation), age (<65 or

265 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or 216) and center

11, Funding OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funders are Major Program | OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funder is CSPC
of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82090043) and | Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD
CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD

”

[PDF_PAGE 138]
Protocol amendments between version 1.3 (April 13", 2023) to version 1.4 (June 11", 2024)
Notes: Parts moved will be marked as “This part was moved to...”

Revisions V13 Vid

(Location) April 13% 2023 June 11% 2024

Version Number/Date | Protocol Version: Version 1.3, April 13, 2023 Protocol Version: Version 1.4, June 11, 2024

(Front Page)

Study Duration | December 2022 until December 2024 December 2022 until December 2025

(Protocol Synopsis)

Inclusion Criteria | @ Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) 4-25 | @ Disabling stroke defined as follows:

(Protocol Synopsis) (inclusive) Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
score 6-25 at the time of randomization, Or NIHSS 4-5 with
disabling deficit (e.g. hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand function)
as determined by the managing clinician

Exclusion criteria | @ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe | @ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known

(Protocol Synopsis) adverse reactions to contrast agents severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate

<30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

Treatment Assignment | Control arm (antiplatelet therapy) Control arm (standard medical treatment)

(Protocol Synopsis) Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel alone) at the discretion of | Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel alone) at. the

local investigators according to Chinese Guidelines for Diagnosis and | discretion of local investigators according to Chinese Guidelines
Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018. for Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2023.
Criteria for Evaluation | @ — Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT] @ Infarct growth between infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h
(Protocol Synopsis) sean at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% (measured by CT scan at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct
by CTP) volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)
© Proportion of patients with any intracranial hemorthage (ICH) | @ — Remove
within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg bleeding classification
72

[PDF_PAGE 139]
Statistical Analysis | The generalized linear model was used to compare the proportion of | The log-binomial regression with the trial center as a random
(Protocol Synopsis) patients with socre of 0-1 on the modified Rankin scale (MRS) at 90 | effect was used to compare the proportion of patients with a score
days in the treatment and control groups. of 0-1 on the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the

treatment and control groups. Risk ratio (RR) and 95%
confidence interval will be reported.

Subgroup Analysis | @ Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and > 16); © Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and > 10);

(Protocol Synopsis)

3.2.1 Inclusion Criteria | @ — Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) 4-25 | @ Disabling stroke defined as follows:

(inclusive) Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
score 6-25 at the time of randomization, Or NIHSS 4-5 with
disabling deficit (e.g. hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand
function) as determined by the managing clinician

3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria | @ — Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe | ® Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known
adverse reactions to contrast agents severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate
<30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)
3.2 Population Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be assessed based on
information available during the screening period. There will be
no retrospective exclusion of patients based on information
coming to knowledge later on.
34.1 Administration | Control arm: Antiplatelet Therapy Control arm: Standard medical treatment
Approach Antiplatelet therapy is administered at the discretion of local | Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel alone) is administered
investigators*. at the discretion of local investigators*.
“Aspirin (150-300mg) is offered to patients allocated in the control | *Aspirin (150-300mg) is offered to patients allocated in the
arm, unless contraindicated. According to Chinese Guidelines for | control arm, unless contraindicated. According to Chinese
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 2018, 150-300mg | Guidelines for Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke
aspirin alone is recommended for acute stroke treatment in patients | 2023, 150-300mg aspirin alone is recommended for acute stroke
73

[PDF_PAGE 140]
who are otherwise eligible for intravenous thrombolysis or EVT as | treatment in patients who are otherwise eligible for intravenous

soon as possible (Class 1 of recommendation, Level A of evidence). | thrombolysis or EVT as soon as possible (Class 1 of

The aspirin dose can be changed to 50-300 mg/day after the acute | recommendation, Level A of evidence). The aspirin dose can be

phase. Clopidogrel is indicated as an alternative in case of aspirin | changed to 50-300 mg/day after the acute phase. Clopidogrel is

intolerance (Class 2 of recommendation, Level C of evidence). indicated as an alternative in case of aspirin intolerance (Class 2
of recommendation, Level C of evidence).

3. Study Design ‘Add: “3.7 Brain Imaging Requirements and Collection” section
eed |
38.1.2 Secondary | @ Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT | ® Infarct growth between infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h
Efficacy Endpoint scan at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% (measured by CT sean at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct

by CTP) volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)
3.8.2 Safety Endpoints | @ — Proportion of patients with any intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) | Remove
within 36h, as defined by Heidelberg bleeding classification
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy | The generalized linear model was used to compare the proportion of | The log-binomial regression with the trial center as a random
Endpoint patients with score of 0-1 on the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 | effect was used to compare the proportion of patients with a score
days in the treatment and control groups. We will also perform adjusted | of 0-1 on the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the
analysis of the primary outcome with adjustment for pre-specified | treatment and control groups. Risk ratio (RR) and 95%
covariates. confidence interval will be reported. We will also perform
adjusted analysis of the primary outcome with adjustment for pre-
specified covariates
5.3.7 Missing Data | Every effort should be made to minimize missing data. Imputation of | The model used to impute the missing values will be the logistic
Processing missing values only be applied to the primary efficacy analysis in the | regression model including the following covariates: allocated
Full Analysis Set (FAS). treatment, baseline age (continuous), baseline NIHSS
Missing primary efficacy outcome values will be replaced using mixed | (continuous), vessel occlusion location. A total of 5 multiply
imputation technics: imputed datasets will be generated to get the final treatment effect,
+ _If the patient discontinued treatment early due to a negative | estimate and associated Cl.
74

[PDF_PAGE 141]
event (e.g., adverse event, disease progression, or death),
their 90-day mRS score will be imputed as >1
‘* If the patient completed treatment but withdrew from follow-
up early due to a negative event (e.g., adverse event or death),
their 90-day mRS score will also be imputed as >1.
© For all other cases, the last available post-treatment mRS
score will be used to classify the missing 90-day mRS score
as <lor>1
To comprehensively assess the potential impact of missing data on
efficacy evaluation, additional sensitivity analyses using alternative
imputation methods may be conducted if deemed necessary. Further
details will be specified in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).
5.3.8 Safety Analyses ‘Add: The safety interim analyses will occur when the first 100,
200, and 300 patients completed 90-day follow-up. Mortality at
90 (£7) days is considered in the safety interim analysis. It was
conducted by the data safety monitoring board (DSMB). If there
were concems about the safety of patients, this board were to
make a recommendation to the trial steering committee about
continuing, stopping, or modifying the trial,
75

[PDF_PAGE 142]
Protocol amendments between version 1.4 (June 11", 2024) to version 1.5 (February 24", 2025)
Notes: Parts moved will be marked as “This part was moved to...”
Revisions vid Vi5
(Location) June 11" 2024 February 24", 2025
Version Number/Date | Protocol Version: Version 1.4, June 11, 2024 Protocol Version: Version 1.5, February 24, 2025
(Front Page)
Funding (Front Page) | CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD Beijing Hospitals Authority Clinical Medicine Development of
special funding support (ZLRK202514); CSPC Recomgen
Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD
Funding (Protocol | CSPC Recomgen Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD Beijing Hospitals Authority Clinical Medicine Development of
Synopsis) special funding support (ZLRK202514); CSPC Recomgen
Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD
Criteria for Evaluation | @ — Infarct growth between infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12)h (measured | @ Infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h, measured by CT sean at 24
(Protocol Synopsis) by CT scan at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infaret_ volume (2/412)h
(rCBF<30% by CTP)

Criteria for Evaluation ‘Add: Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-SD-SL) at
femme | sng RA
Interim analysis The safety interim analyses will occur when the first 100, 200,
lems | | pcan eg |
Statistical Analysis | The log-binomial regression with the trail center as a random effect | The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in the ITT
(Protocol Synopsis) was used to compare the proportion of patients with a score of 0-1 on | population using modified Poisson regression to determine the

the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the treatment and | risk ratio (RR) and its 95% confidence interval (C1).
control groups. Risk ratio (RR) and 95% confidence interval will be
reported.
Subgroup analysis | @ + Medium vessel occlusion site (M2-M4 segment of middle] @ — Occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA, M3-M4 segment of
(Protocol Synopsis) cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral MCA, ACA, PCA and stenosis)
76

[PDF_PAGE 143]
Peery

1. Background However, the MR CLEAN randomized trial and CT for Late

Endovascular Reperfusion (CLEAR) studies suggest benefit with
EVT compared to medical management in the 6 to 24 hour
window with non-contrast CT selection [6,7].

I. Background With advancement of techniques and technologies, the feasibility of | Although technological advances have made EVT feasible in
EVT for DMVO has been demonstrated by several non-randomized | DMVO, the procedural difficulty and associated risks may be
studies. However, data from randomized, controlled trials are lacking | higher compared to those for LVO [5,11]. The Endovascular
on whether EVT is also beneficial in persons with occlusion of medium | Treatment to Improve Outcomes for Medium Vessel Occlusions
or distal vessels. (ESCAPE-MeVO) and Endovascular Therapy plus Best Medical

Treatment [BMT] versus BMT Alone for Medium Vessel
Occlusion Stroke- A Pragmatic, Intemational, Multicenter,
Randomized Trial (DISTAL) trials showed that thrombectomy
added no clinical benefit as compared with best medical
‘management alone in stroke due to medium-vessel occlusion.
Furthermore, thrombectomy appeared to show higher mortality
(12,13).

3.7 Brain Imaging | All sites are required to use CTPDoe (Shukun, Beijing, China). All sites are required to use CTPDoc (Shukun, Beijing, China)

Requirements and sofiware to provide brain imaging assessments.

Collection

3.7.1.2 Imaging of Visit | A NCCT should be performed to assess intracranial hemorrhage. ANCCT should be performed to assess intracranial hemorrhage

2 and infarct volume.

3.7.1.3 Imaging of Visit | A NCCT is recommended to be reviewed to assess the infarct volume. | A NCCT is recommended to be reviewed.

4

3.7.2 Imaging Data Add: Furthermore, because OPTION is a randomized, controlled

fume Pi a |
7

[PDF_PAGE 144]
Po Frassignment to reduce bias
3.8.1.2 Secondary | @ Infarct growth between infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12)h (measured | @ Infarct volume at 24 (-2/+12) h, measured by CT scan at 24
Efficacy Endpoint by CT scan at 24 (-2/+12) h) and baseline infarct volume (2/12) h

(*CBF<30% by CTP)
38.1.2 Secondary ‘Add: Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-SD-SL) at
Efficacy Endpoint 90 (£7) days
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy | The primary hypothesis will test the superiority of the proportion of | Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis
Endpoint patients with mRS 0-1 at 90 days in the treatment group compared to | as follows:
control group, with the null and alternative hypotheses as follows: Ho: Pritykara = Poonirot versus Hi: Pritykara # Peontrol
Ho: Risk ratio (Prsrsksna/Peoniai) SA. versus Hy: Risk ratio (Pryryk- | Where Parkins and Prono are the proportion of mRS score 0 to
ev Peon) >2 1 at 90 (£7) days in the group treated with rTNK-tPA and
Where Risk ratio is the ratio of the proportion of patients with mRS 0- | standard medical treatment (control group) respectively.
1 at 90 days between treatment and control groups, with a superiority
margin of 0. If the lower limit of 95% confidence interval bound
exceeds margin, indicating that the treatment group is superior to the
control group.
5.3.5 Primary Efficacy | The log-binomial regression with the trial center as a random effect | The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in the ITT
Endpoint was used to compare the proportion of patients with a score of 0-1 on | population using modified Poisson regression model to determine
the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at 90 days in the treatment and | the risk ratio (RR) and its 95% confidence interval (Cl). We will
control groups. Risk ratio (RR) and 95% confidence interval will be | also perform adjusted analysis of the primary outcome with
reported. We will also perform adjusted analysis of the primary | adjustment for pre-specified covariates. Details will be listed in
outcome with adjustment for pre-specified covariates. the SAP of the study.
5.36 Secondary | For the analysis of the following binary secondary efficacy endpoints, | For the analysis of the following binary secondary efficacy
Efficacy Endpoints log-binomial regression will be employed to determine RR and its 95% | endpoints, modified Poisson regression model will be employed
Ch: to determine RR and its 95% Cl
© Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as anmRS of | @ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an
78

[PDF_PAGE 145]
0-2 at 90 (£7) days MRS of 0-2 at 90 (£7) days
© Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) hours, | @ — Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 (-2/+12) hours,
defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by
© Proportion of early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) hours, defined cP
as a NIHSS score of 0 or | or NIHSS drop of =8 from baseline @ = Proportion of early clinical response at 24 (-2/+12) hours,
For the analysis of the following continuous secondary endpoints, defined as a NIHSS score of 0 or 1 or NIHSS drop of 28
generalized linear mixed model will be employed, and beta from baseline
coefficients with 95% CI will be reported: For the analysis of the following continuous secondary endpoints,
© Infarct growth between infarct volume at 24(-2/*12) hours and | linear regression models will be employed. A transformation will
baseline infarct volume be performed if needed. A win ratio method will be used if
© NIHSS change from baseline to 7 (#2) days/discharge (whichever } normality assumption is seriously violated:
is earlier) © Infarct volume at 24(-2/-+12) hours
© NIHSS change from baseline to 7 (42) daysidischarge
(whichever is earlier)
@ Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-SD-SL) at
90 (+7) days

5.3.7 Missing Data | The model used to impute the missing values will be the logistic | The model used to impute the missing values will be the logistic

Processing regression model including the following covariates: allocated | regression model including the following covariates: allocated
treatment, baseline age (continuous), baseline NIHSS (continuous), | treatment, baseline age (continuous), baseline NIHSS
vessel occlusion location. A total of 5 multiply imputed datasets will | (continuous), vessel occlusion location, and time from symptom
be generated to get the final treatment effect estimate and associated | onset to randomization (continuous). A total of 5 multiply
cl imputed datasets will be generated to get the final treatment effect,

estimate and associated Cl.

5.3.8 Safety Analyses | Safety endpoints, including proportion of patients with sICH within 36 | Safety endpoints, including proportion of patients with sICH
hours, proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days, and mortality | within 36 hours, proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 (+7) days,
at 90 (£7) days, will be compared using the log-binomial regression. | and mortality at 90 (£7) days, will be compared using the

79

[PDF_PAGE 146]
Po Timid Peissonregression
5.3.9 Subgroup Analysis | Medium vessel occlusion site (M2-M4 segment of middle cerebral | Occlusion site (M2 segment of MCA, M3-M4 segment of MCA,
artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery) ACA, PCA and stenosis)
11, Funding and | OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funder is CSPC Recomgen | OPTION is an investigator-initiated trial; funders are Beijing
Conflict of Interest Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD Hospitals Authority Clinical Medicine Development of special
funding support (ZLRK202514) and CSPC  Recomgen
Pharmaceutical (Guangzhou) Co., LTD.
80

[PDF_PAGE 147]
Protocol amendments between version 1.5 (February 24", 2025) to version 1.6 (June 20", 2025)
Notes: Parts moved will be marked as “This part was moved to...”
Revisions VL5 V1.6
(Location) February 24", 2025 June 20", 2025
Version Number/Date | Protocol Version: Version 1.5, February 24, 2025 Protocol Version: Version 1.6, June 20, 2025
(Front Page)
Interim Analysis | The safety interim analyses will occur when the first 100, 200, and _—_| The original protocol specified that, the safety interim analyses
(Protocol Synopsis) 300 patients completed 90-day follow-up. One efficacy interim will occur when the first 100, 200, and 300 patients completed
analysis will be taken place when 50% of the target sample size (284 | 90-day follow-up. One efficacy interim analysis will be taken
cases) have completed 90-day follow-up. The data safety and place when 50% of the target sample size (284 cases) have
monitoring board (DSMB) will review the data at the planned interim | completed 90-day follow-up. The data safety and monitoring
analysis and may recommend stopping the study early for safety board (DSMB) will review the data at the planned interim
concerns, efficacy results or futility. analysis and may recommend stopping the study early for safety
concems, efficacy results or futility.
Due to the fast speed of enrollment, after review with the DSMB
in June 2025, the original interim analysis plan no longer serves
its purpose. On the recommendation of the DSMB, the Steering
Committee decided to rescind the planned efficacy interim
analysis and the third safety analysis. Since no formal assessment
of efficacy is done and no alpha is spent, we will not adjust the
alpha level or p values for the final analysis,
Statistical Analysis | At the efficacy interim analysis, where the primary analysis will be | Since the efficacy interim analysis is rescinded, the final efficacy
(Protocol Synopsis) __| performed on 50% of total patients (284) have completed the 90-day | analysis will be performed at the 0.05 significance level.
follow-up, a type I error of 0.003 will be allocated for the efficacy
evaluation, If the study continues beyond the efficacy interim analysis,
the final efficacy analysis will be performed at the 0.049 significance
81

[PDF_PAGE 148]
[Tevet to maintain an overaltypeLemorrate of 0S.

5.1 Sample Size One efficacy interim analysis will be taken place when 50% of the | Due to protocol amendments that eliminated the pre-specified

target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow-up. A | interim efficacy analysis, this study maintains the original two-
Lan-DeMets alpha spending function will be used to control the overall | sided alpha level of 0.05 and the planned sample size of 568, with
alpha level, using OBrien and Fleming boundaries (corresponding to | an increased the statistical power of 82.7%.

alpha level of 0,003 and 0,049 at the interim and final analysis,

respectively).

5.3.8 Safety Analyses ‘Add: Due to the fast speed of enrollment, after review with the
DSMB in June 2025, the original interim analysis plan no longer
serves its purpose. On the recommendation of the DSMB, the
Steering Committee decided to rescind the planned efficacy
interim analysis and the third safety analysis. Since no formal
assessment of efficacy is done and no aloha is spent, we will not
adjust the alpha level or p values for the final analysis.

82
