[PDF_PAGE 1]
OPTION Statistical Analysis Plan
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN
OrTi@N

Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel

Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective,

Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial
Prepared by
Yingting Zuo, PhD
Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Duolao Wang, PhD
Global Health Trials Unit, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United
Kingdom
Version: Original version 1.0
Date: December 24, 2022
1

[PDF_PAGE 2]
Approvals by
ae =

Prof. Junwei Hao (Chief

Ht 4 la ’
Investigator) “ ]un (
Dr. Yingting Zuo (Trial
AN vo 24/12/2022

Statistician) Yi =| /

Prof. Duolao Wang (Senior Dolao Warg

Statistician)

2

[PDF_PAGE 3]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS ......... cscs 3D
2.1 Primary ODjective ........esseeccecsseecseeceeeeneeseeeeneecsneesneecaeceneeeneesanessneesneessneesntessneceneesaneee D
2.2 Secondary Objectives ..........sceceecceecceecseeseeeesseesseessneesaeceeeeneesaeesneessessneesntesseeeneesantee D
3.1 Primary Efficacy Emdpoint 0.2... cesses eeseeceeesseeeeeneeeeeeeneeennessnessneeseneeeneeesneesaeeses 8
3.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint .............scseccecssecsseessessseseeseeeseesneesneessnesssesssneesaeeesneesaeesee 8
3.3 Safety EMG point occ cccsecsseceeseesesseesecsseseesssnesseeseesenseessesessecsessessecseesessnseneese D.
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan........cccccessesssesssesssessstesssseessesssesssessnessseesstessssessseessessee 9
4.2 Selection of Study Population ..........cccscecsecsseessessseesseesssessessseesseessesssesseessessseessees LO
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria.......cccssssssscsssssseccesssssssessssssssuecsssssssnnessssssssecessssssseees LO
4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria..........cccsccsssssccsssecsssnseccssneesssnsecsssneccssneeessnmeesssnnecsssnesssneecesseee LD
4.3 Method of Treatment Assignment and Randomization..............0..:eeceeeeeeee 12
4.4 Treatment Masking (Blinding) 0... eeceeceseeeeeeeeneeeeneesneecneeeneeentessneesneeeneees LB
4.5 Unter amal ysis ..........eesseeeseecceeeseeeeeseeeseeesneesneeseneceneeaseesneesnessneesnsesaessneesatessneesaeeeenees 13
6.1 Intention-to-Treat (ITT) Population..............eceecececseeeeeesieesneeeseeesneesneeseeeeseeeeee LA
6.2 Per-Protocol (PP) Population ...........:ccccccceecssesseessnesssesestecsseesstessneesseessnessssessseesseessee LA
6.3 Safety Population.........c.ececcseesseecseecssecssesseecsseesnesssessseesstecsseesssesssessnesssessiessseeeseesaee LS
7. GENERAL ISSUES FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS ......csccscseesseesseesstesseessteesseeesee LS
7.1 General Principles .......cscsccccsssssssesssessssssisecccsssssnnsesssessssssnecsssssssnsesessssssnssneecsssssssnees LS.
7.2 Methods for Withdrawals and Missing Data ............ccccssessseesssesseesssessseessteesseeses LO
7.2.1 Withdrawals ........sscscccsssscsssseccssnecsssneecsssneccssnsecessnecsssneecssnnecsssnnecssanecsssnecssneecsssns 16
7.2.2 Missing Data........sccccsscsssseccssssecsssseecsssseecssneecsssnessssnsecssnsecsssnnecsssnecsssneesssaneessses 16
7.3 Data Transformations ...........eseecseeec secs eeseeeenteesseesneecneceneceneesaneesneesnneesneesntessneeeneeseee LT
7.4 Mulitcenter Data... esseecceccseessescseseeesseneesneesseesneesnecsneeeneessneesneessessnessneeseneesneessee LT
3

[PDF_PAGE 4]
7.6 COVAVIACCS esse eeseeeeceeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeneecnecenecenecaneesneesanecsneesuessneceneesanessntesneessnesentessneseneesees LB
7.7 Planned Subgroups........esseecseesseccesseeescsesseeesneeeseeseeesneesneeeaeesseesneesnneesneesneeseneseneesees LB
8. DISPOSITION OF SUBJECTS AND WITHDRAWALS... cccecseeseeeteetesteeeeneee LOD
9. DEMOGRAPHICS AND BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS 00... eecessesseeseseeseeeteene LOD
10.1 Primary Efficacy Analysis ...........cccssesssesssessstsssssesssessseessessssessneesstessssessesssessseessnesss 20)
10.1.1 Crude Analysis ........scccsccssessseessssssseessssssssesssessnesssessnsesssesssessssesssessnesssessaeeessetses 21
10.1.2 Covariates Adjusted Amalysis..........ccccssssssesssessseeseesseessersssesssessnesssessneeesteeses 21
10.1.4 Subgroup Amallysis.........ccscssssscsseessessseessesesseessessssessecssesssseessestsssesssessseessessessss 22,
10.2 Secondary Efficacy AmalySis.........sccccsssseccsssescessescssseecssneecsssneessssneesssnnecsssnneesssnessss 23
10.2.1 Ordinal Modified Rankin Scale Score at 90 Days .........csssccssecessecsssneeessnee 23
10.2.2 Modified Rankin Scale Score 0 to 2 at 90 Days........eseeeceeeceeseeeeteesneesneesneees 24
10.2.3 Reperfusion at 24 HOUrs ...........scecseecceecceecseeesseeeeneecneeeenessneeceessneessneesneesnessneees 24
10.2.4 Infarct Growth .....esceecceecseesseesseeesneesneeeeneeeneessneesneesnsessnecsaecsneesaeessneesneesnessneees 24
10.2.5 Early Clinical Response at 24 HOUrs ..........ccccccsseessessseeeseesstessteessteesneesneessees 2S
10.2.6 NIHSS Change from Baseline to 7 Days or Discharge ...........:ccseeeeees 25
11.1 SICH Rate within 36 HOUrS..........cccccsssesssesssescstssssseeseesseesseessnessstecsisessteesseessesssness 2D
11.3 Systemic Bleeding at 90 Days ....ccsscsssssssecccsssssssessscssssssseccssssssnusessssssssssesssssses 20
11.4 Mortality at 90 Days........ccscssessesssssesseesssesssesssesssssesssessseesseessusssssesssssssssssessseesseessessss 20
11.5 Adverse Evemts.......ccssscsssseccssseecsssnessssnecsssnsecsssneesssnecsssnseccssnscessssecsssnecsssneeessnseesssns 20
11.5.1 Adverse Events.........cccscssssssessssesssessssecsseessesesseessssssecsscssesssssessestsseessessssecssesssesees 27
11.5.2 Serious Adverse Event ........:.e:cseccecsescsesesseesseeesneesneesnneesneecaeseneessessneesneesnneees 27
4

[PDF_PAGE 5]
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
“Abbreviation ‘Definition = =————(i‘“‘S;SSS”S”S””O
“AE—~—~«CAverseevent ss—<—s—sSSSOSCSsSCS

cl Confidence interval

CT Computed tomography

CTP Computed tomography perfusion

CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events

DSMB Data and Safety Monitoring Board

GEE Generalized estimating equation

GenOR Generalized odds ratio

GUSTO Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen

Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries

ICH Intracranial hemorrhage

IPTW Inverse probability of treatment weighting

mT Intention-to-Treat

IWRS Interactive Web Response System

MR Magnetic resonance

MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities

mRS Modified Rankin Scale

NIHSS National Institute of Health Stroke Scale

PP Per-Protocol

PT Preferred term

thTNK-tPA Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator

RR Risk ratio

SAE Serious adverse event

5

[PDF_PAGE 6]
“SAP —sStatistical Analysis Plan
sICH Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage
SOC System Organ Class
Tmax Time to maximum of the residue function
tPA Tissue plasminogen activator
6

[PDF_PAGE 7]
1. BACKGROUND

Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type Plasminogen
Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in Extended Time
Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint
Trial (OPTION) is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel,
blinded endpoint, controlled clinical trial to test efficacy and safety of rhnoTNK-tPA in
patients presenting within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have a non-large
vessel occlusion and evidence of salvageable tissue on their baseline computed
tomography perfusion (CTP).

This Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) describes the statistical methods to be used
for the OPTION. The version of the SAP has been based on the version 1.2 of the
study protocol.

2. STUDY OBJECTIVE

2.1 Primary Objective

The primary objective of OPTION is to evaluate whether treatment with rhTNK-tPA,

administered between 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset can improve neurological

outcome in patients who have a non-large vessel occlusion screened by perfusion

imaging.

2.2 Secondary Objectives

@ = To assess the level of disability (shift analysis of modified Rankin Scale [MRS]
score) at 90 days

@ To assess the proportion of favorable functional outcome (mRS score 0 to 2) at

90 days
@ To assess the proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 hours (>90% reduction

in time to maximum of the residue function [Tmax] >6s lesion volume by CTP)

7

[PDF_PAGE 8]
@ To assess infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by computed
tomography [CT] at 24 hours) and baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)

@ To assess the proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 hours
(National Institute of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS] drop of =8 from baseline or
NIHSS score of 0 or | at 24 hours)

@ To assess the change of the NIHSS score at 7 days or discharge if earlier from
baseline

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of symptomatic
intracranial hemorrhage (sICH) within 36 hours

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of intracranial
hemorrhage (ICH) within 36 hours

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of systemic bleeding
(The Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for
Occluded Coronary Arteries [GUSTO]: moderate and severe bleeding) at 90 days

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of mortality at 90
days

3. STUDY ENDPOINTS

3.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90 days

3.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Ordinal mRS score at 90 days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-2 at 90 days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 hours, defined as >90% reduction in
Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP

@ Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT at 24 hours) and

8

[PDF_PAGE 9]
baseline infarct volume (rCBF<30% by CTP)
@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 hours, defined as a
NIHSS drop of =8 from baseline or NIHSS score of 0 or 1
@ NIHSS change from baseline to 7 days/discharge (whichever is earlier)
3.3 Safety Endpoint
@ Proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification
@ Proportion of patients with ICH within 36 hours, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification
@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 days, as defined by GUSTO: moderate and
severe bleeding
@ Mortality at 90 days
4, STUDY METHODS
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel, blinded endpoint,
controlled clinical trial. Patients are randomly assigned to receive rhTNK-tPA or
standard medical treatment in a 1:1 ratio. It is planned to recruit at least 568 patients
in about 40 sites in China. The follow-up period covers the period from the subacute
stage (day 7 or hospital discharge) to the final follow-up examination 83-97 days after
randomization which defines the primary endpoint. The study patient flow outline
following Consort diagram is shown in Figure 1.
9

[PDF_PAGE 10]
XXX Were excluded
XXX Not mectng target mismatch profile on CTP
XXX Premorbid disability with  prestoke modified
Rankin scale (mS) seore> 1
‘XXX Had large veel oclison
XXX No consent obtained
XXX Other reason
‘XXX Randomized to study inadvertently
XX Allocated to receive teneseplaxe [XXX Allocated o receive standard medical weatment
XXX Received treatment as randomized XXX Received treatment as randomized
=m
XX Final assesment valle [xXx Final asesoment avaiable
XXX Atended 90-y vst XXX Attended 90-day visit
=
=a
Figure 1. The study patient flow outline following Consort diagram.
4.2 Selection of Study Population
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria
Clinical inclusion criteria
@ Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
@ Age =18 years
@ Pre-stroke mRS score 0-1
@ Baseline NIHSS score 4-25 at the time of randomization
@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h (onset time refers to “last-seen well”)
@ Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible representatives
Imaging inclusion criteria
@ Target mismatch profile on CTP defined as an ischemic core volume <50mL, a
mismatch ratio >1.2, and a mismatch volume >10mL
10

[PDF_PAGE 11]
4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria

Clinical exclusion criteria

@ = Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours

© Contraindications to thrombolysis

@ Planned or anticipated treatment with endovascular therapy

@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if in the judgement of the managing
clinician is likely to result in a NIHSS <4 at randomization

@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in woman of childbearing potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation factor deficiency

@ Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or anticoagulant use. If on
warfarin, international normalized ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin time >15s; if
use of any direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if use of
heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ Use of glycoprotein ITb/IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/yL

@ Known severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate <30mL/min or
serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe adverse reactions
to contrast agents

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

@ Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last 1 month, e.g.
gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than skin rash) to contrast

"1

[PDF_PAGE 12]
agents

@ Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >185mmHg or
diastolic blood pressure >110mmHg)

@ = Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be expected to survive more
than half a year

© Current participation in any investigational study that may confound outcome
assessment of the study

@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is inappropriate for
participation in the trial or could impose hazards to the patient (e.g. inability to
understand and/or follow the study procedures and/or follow-up due to mental
disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

@ Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute large vessel occlusion on Magnetic resonance (MR)/CT angiography,
including internal carotid artery, M1, vertebral arteries and basilar artery

@ Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to be >1/3 MCA territory

4.3 Method of Treatment Assignment and Randomization

Once patients’ eligibility requirements are confirmed, patients are randomized 1:1 to

receive rhTNK-tPA or standard medical treatment through the Interactive Web

Response System (IWRS). The study treatment kit number is also assigned by IWRS

at that time. Patients are treated as soon as possible after randomization. Patients are

considered enrolled in the study once they have provided the informed consent

and been randomized. The patient randomization numbers will be allocated

sequentially in the order in which the patients are randomized. A dynamic

randomization procedure by minimization will be done for achieving a balance of the

12

[PDF_PAGE 13]
following pre-specified factors: age (<65 or 265 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or =16)
and center.

4.4 Treatment Masking (Blinding)

Only patient and treating physician are aware of the randomization information. All
endpoints of in-hospital visits will be evaluated by a qualified blind evaluation study
physician who does not know the treatment group. Assessments of primary endpoint
on the mRS will be performed by independent assessors, blinded to the allocated and
actually received treatment. Their assessment will be based on standardized reports of
a telephone interview by trained research personnel who are not aware of treatment
allocation.

4.5 Interim Analysis

Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is in place to monitors patient safety,
treatment efficacy, and study conduct on an ongoing basis. An independent statistician
will prepare summary statistics on enrolment, subject status in the study, baseline
characteristics, and safety data, including summary tables of coded SAEs and these
will be examined by the DSMB.

One efficacy interim analysis is planned and will be taken place when 50% of the
target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow-up. A Lan-DeMets alpha
spending function! will be used to control for the overall alpha level, using O’Brien
and Fleming boundaries will be used at the interim analysis and final analysis with
alpha of two-sided 0.003, and 0.049.

5. SAMPLE SIZE ESTIMATES

In this study, standard medical treatment is set as the control group. The primary

outcome in this study is the occurrence of patients with mRS 0-1 at 90 days. The
13

[PDF_PAGE 14]
sample size is based on the primary outcome.

Based on the reported pooled data? of the stroke thrombolysis trials in the
extended time window, we expect a 12% absolute difference in the proportion of
patients reaching the primary outcome between patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and
standard medical treatment (expected rate of excellent functional outcome 50% in
patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and 38% in patients treated with standard medical
treatment). Considering the potential impact of the one interim efficacy analysis on
the probability of type I error, we adjusted the statistical significance to a two-sided
alpha of 0.049. The total sample size of 568 (n=284 per treatment group) will yield
80% power to detect the specified difference at the two-sided 0.049 significance level,
with a 5% dropout rate.

This estimation was performed based on PASS (NCSS, LLC.) version 15.0.

6. ANALYSIS POPULATIONS

6.1 Intention-to-Treat (ITT) Population

The ITT population* includes all patients who were randomized, received at least
one-day treatment of study drugs, had baseline important data, and had at least one
assessment of the primary efficacy evaluation. The ITT population will be the primary
analysis population for the efficacy endpoints and patients will be analyzed according
to the treatment group to which they were assigned at randomization.

6.2 Per-Protocol (PP) Population

The PP population is defined as the subset of the ITT population excluding major
protocol violators deemed to have the potential to affect patient outcome in terms of
efficacy.

The PP population includes patients who actually received the assigned treatment
and do not have major protocol violations or deviations. Major protocol violations or

14

[PDF_PAGE 15]
deviations will be identified in a blinded fashion prior to database lock. More

specifically, patients with anyone of the following criteria will be excluded from the

PP population. These deviations will be determined based on the medical monitors”

records, as well as programmatically, using the following criteria at a minimum:

@ Received but did not complete treatment with study drug, or dose of study drug
administered outside recommended dose;

@ Violate inclusion or exclusion criteria;

@ Administering treatments that seriously interfere with the evaluation of efficacy
after inclusion;

@ Missing essential information.

A list of patients to be excluded from the randomized patients to create the PP-
Efficacy analysis will be established and validated by the Steering Committee prior to
unblinding.

6.3 Safety Population
The Safety Population includes all patients who receive any amount of study drug.
Patients will be assigned to the different populations prior to unblinding of the
database. Patients who withdraw informed consent immediately after randomization
and are not to receive any treatment should be excluded from Safety Population. In
case of violation of the randomization scheme, patients will be classified according to
the treatment they actually received. The Safety Population is the safety evaluation
population in this study.
7. GENERAL ISSUES FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
7.1 General Principles
Data were summarized by means and standard deviations, or medians (interquartile
ranges) for continuous variables, and frequency along with percentage for

15

[PDF_PAGE 16]
categorical variables.

All statistical analyses will be performed using SAS Software version 9.4
(SAS Institute) and R version 4.4.1.
7.2 Methods for Withdrawals and Missing Data
7.2.1 Withdrawals
Reasons for missing data will be collected and described, including withdrawal of
consent and loss to follow-up. The reasons for withdrawal of consent and loss to
follow-up will be listed in a summary table. Subjects who don’t complete the 90-day
study but provide at least one post-baseline measure for a specific endpoint will be
included in the analysis.
7.2.2 Missing Data
All efforts should be made to ensure near complete follow-up, with particular focus
on the assessment of primary outcome.
7.2.2.1 Baseline Covariates
Missing baseline covariates will be imputed using simple imputation methods in the
covariate adjusted analysis based on the covariate distributions, should the missing
values for a particular covariate be less than 5%. For a continuous variable, missing
values will be imputed from random values from a normal distribution with mean and
SD calculated from the available sample. For a categorical variable, missing values
will be imputed from random values from a uniform distribution with probabilities P1,
P, ..., and Pk from the sample.

If the missing values for a covariate are >5% then they will be imputed by the
multiple imputation.

16

[PDF_PAGE 17]
7.2.2.2 Efficacy Outcomes

Missing primary outcome values will be replaced using mixed imputation method.

@ = Ifthe patient discontinued treatment early due to a negative event (e.g., adverse
event, disease progression, or death), their 90-day mRS score will be imputed
as >.

@ Ifthe patient completed treatment but withdrew from follow-up early due to a
negative event (e.g., adverse event or death), their 90-day mRS score will also be
imputed as >1.

@ For all other cases, the last available post-treatment mRS score will be used to
classify the missing 90-day mRS score as <1 or >1.

Sensitivity analyses based on different hypotheses about the missingness pattern of
the primary outcome will be performed to test for the robustness of the primary analysis
results (see section “Primary Efficacy Analysis”).

7.3 Data Transformations

The analysis of continuous variables may require transformation to normalize the

distributions, but these variables will be mainly analyzed using nonparametric

statistical tests. Decisions to transform the distribution of some variables for analysis
will be taken after the blind review of the data, and before unblinding the treatment
code.

7.4 Mulitcenter Data

In this analysis, the center effect will be considered as a cluster effect in the models in

the sensitivity analysis of the primary outcome’. Centers that enroll few patients will

be pooled together based on the geographic region, hospital tiers, healthcare quality,
and other factors to ensure that the sites or pooled sites have a reasonable sample size
for the statistical analyses (=20 patients for each stratum). This process will be blindly

[PDF_PAGE 18]
completed and finalized before the database is locked.
7.5 Multiplicity
Analyses of secondary outcomes, safety outcomes and additional analyses for the
primary outcome are regarded as exploratory in nature, therefore, multiplicity
adjustment will not apply to the primary and secondary outcome analyses®.
7.6 Covariates
In the covariates-adjusted analysis, the following variables will be adjusted.
@ Age (Continuous);
@ Baseline NIHSS score (Continuous);
@ Vessel occlusion location (Binary: [anterior circulation and posterior circulation]);
@ Time from symptom onset to randomization (Continuous).
If a covariates-adjusted model does not converge, inverse probability of treatment
weighting (IPTW) method’ will be used.
7.7 Planned Subgroups
Subgroup analyses will be performed on a few important patient characteristics and
other variables of interest. The predefined subgroups including:
@ Age (<65 years and > 65 years);
@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization (4.5-9 hours, 9-24
hours and stroke on awakening);
@ Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and > 16);
@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);
@ Medium vessel occlusion (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery-M4 segment of
middle cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery);
@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and >100 mg/dL);
18

[PDF_PAGE 19]
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure (<140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).
8. DISPOSITION OF SUBJECTS AND WITHDRAWALS
The number of patients for each of the following categories will be summarized by
treatment group.
@ Total number of assessed patients;
@ Number of randomized patients;
@ Number of patients completing the study and not completing the study (grouped
by treatment and main reason);
@ Number of crossover patients;
@ Number of patients included in the ITT population;
@ Number of patients included in the PP population;
@ Number of patients included in the Safety population.
9. DEMOGRAPHICS AND BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Clinically important demographic and disease characteristics at screening will be
summarized with descriptive statistics for each treatment group. Summaries will be
produced for the ITT population and PP population.
If the missing value exceeds 5%, the denominator will be added in the footnote of
the corresponding summary table.
The variables to be summarized include but are not restricted to the following:
@ Age
@ Sex
@ Medical history (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, atrial
fibrillation and prior stroke)
@ Pre stroke onset mRS score
@ Baseline serum glucose
19

[PDF_PAGE 20]
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure
@ Baseline NIHSS score
@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization
@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation)
@ Occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery-M4 segment of middle
cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery)
@ Baseline serum glucose
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure
10. EFFICACY ANALYSES,
Efficacy analyses will be performed using the ITT population with patients grouped
according to treatment assigned at randomization. Available data regardless of
adherence to the protocol will be included in the efficacy analyses. Secondarily, the
same analyses will be repeated on the PP population. All efficacy analyses will
provide the point estimate of treatment effect with associated two-sided 95% CIs.
Visit windows will be derived according to Table 1 and applied for all clinical
efficacy assessments. If there are multiple assessments within the same window, the
one closest to the target time point will be used. Assessments that are outside of the
defined windows will not be used in analysis.
Table 1 Definition of Visit Windows.
10.1 Primary Efficacy Analysis
20

[PDF_PAGE 21]
The primary efficacy outcome is the proportion of excellent functional outcome
defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90 days. The mRS score is an assessment of disability
with values from 0 (no symptoms at all) to 5 (sever disability) to 6 (death). The mRS
score is collected at 90 days after randomization. If death occurs prior to a scheduled
assessment day, the mRS will be considered available and will be set to 6. Missing
primary outcome will be imputed using multiple imputation method as described in
Section 7.2.2 Missing Data.
10.1.1 Crude Analysis
Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis as follows:

Ho: Prrnk-tpa - Peontrol S A versus Hi: Prhnk-tra - Peontrol> A
Where P mrnk-ra and Peontroi are the proportion of mRS score 0 to | at 90 days in the
group treated with rhTNK-tPA and standard medical treatment (control group)
respectively, with a superiority margin of 0. If the lower limit of 95% confidence
interval bound exceeds margin, indicating that the treatment group is superior to the
control group.

The primary analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will be based on ITT
population, which will be supported by the secondary analysis based on PP
population. The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in the ITT population
using generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable to derive the risk
ratio (RR) and its 95% CI. When there are zero events in one group, an exact analysis
should be performed using PROC FREQ to calculate the risk difference and its 95%
CL. Crude analysis will be the primary analysis to draw the main conclusion regarding
the efficacy of the study intervention.

10.1.2 Covariates Adjusted Analysis
24

[PDF_PAGE 22]
We will also perform adjusted analysis of the primary outcome with adjustment for
the following covariates: age, baseline NIHSS score, vessel occlusion location, and
time from symptom onset to randomization will be used to calculate the adjusted RR
with 95% CI. Imputation for baseline missing covariates (see description in the
Section 7.2.2) will be made for covariate adjusted analysis.
10.1.3 Sensitivity Analysis
To assess the influence of the missing primary endpoints on the treatment effect
estimate®, sensitivity analyses will be performed using the same statistical methods as
described in Section 10.1.1, under the different assumptions of the missing outcome
below:
(1) Complete case:
Patients with a missing primary endpoint will be excluded.
(2) Worst-case scenario:
All patients with a missing primary endpoint will be considered as having the worst
mRS score of 6.
(3) Worst-Best scenario:
Patients with a missing primary endpoint in the control group will be considered as a
excellent outcome (mRS 0-1) while patients with a missing primary outcome in
thTNK-tPA group will be considered as not achieving the excellent outcome (mRS 2-
6).
(4) Assessment of center effect:
A generalized estimating equation (GEE) model with Poisson distribution and log link
function will be fitted to estimate the RR between the intervention and control
treatment with treatment, and the center as a cluster effect.
10.1.4 Subgroup Analysis

22

[PDF_PAGE 23]
Subgroup analysis of the primary endpoint will be performed on the following

subgroup variables, and the RR and its 95% CI will be estimated for each category of

a subgroup variable to assess exploratorily homogeneity of treatment effect by a

subgroup variable.

@ Age (<65 years and > 65 years);

@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization (4.5-9 hours, 9-24
hours, and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and > 16);

@ = Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);

@ Medium vessel occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery-M4 segment
of middle cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery);

@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and =100 mg/dL);

@ Baseline systolic blood pressure (<140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).

Assessment of the homogeneity of treatment effect by a subgroup variable will be
conducted by a generalized linear model with the treatment, subgroup variable, and
their interaction term as predictors, and the P-value presented for the interaction term.
Subgroup analysis will be performed on both ITT and PP populations.

10.2 Secondary Efficacy Analysis

10.2.1 Ordinal Modified Rankin Scale Score at 90 Days

The secondary efficacy outcome is the ordinal mRS score at 90 days. mRS is an
assessment of disability with values from 0 (no symptoms at all) to 5 (severe
disability); death will be scored as a 6. The distribution of mRS at Day 90 will be
summarized descriptively, and plotted using Grotta bars.

For the analysis of ordinal mRS at 90 days, an ordinal logistic regression model
with treatment as the study variable will be used to calculate the common odds ratio

23

[PDF_PAGE 24]
and corresponding 95% CI between two treatment groups. Prior to its application, the
proportional odds assumption will be tested. If the P-value for the overall score test of
the proportional odds hypothesis is >0.05, the proportional odds assumption will be
deemed acceptable. If the proportional odds hypothesis is rejected, the generalized
odds ratio (GenOR)’ and corresponding 95% CI will be calculated using WINS
package.
10.2.2 Modified Rankin Scale Score 0 to 2 at 90 Days
The mRS score will be used to evaluate the proportion of patients with a score 0 to 2
versus 3 or higher at Day 90. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI
will be calculated by fitting the generalized linear model.
10.2.3 Reperfusion at 24 Hours
Reperfusion at 24 hours, defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by
CTP. The proportion of improvement on reperfusion at 24 hours between groups will
be compared by the generalized linear model. The crude and adjusted RR and
corresponding 95% CI will be reported.
10.2.4 Infaret Growth
Infarct growth between final infract volume at 24 hours and baseline infarct volume,
which will be provided by central image analysis. Infarct growth between two groups
will be tested by linear regression model with treatment as the study variable. Infarct
growth may be log transformed if necessary. Normality assumption for the residuals
will be assessed using Q-Q plot. The crude and adjusted mean difference/geometric
mean ratio and corresponding 95% CI will be reported. A win ratio method!” will be
used if normality assumption is seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will
be calculated using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW.
24

[PDF_PAGE 25]
approach!!,

10.2.5 Early Clinical Response at 24 Hours

Early clinical response at 24 hours, defined as a NIHSS drop of >8 from baseline or
NIHSS score of 0 or 1. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be
calculated by fitting a generalized linear model.

10.2.6 NIHSS Change from Baseline to 7 Days or Discharge

The NIHSS is a standardized neurological examination score, with scores ranging
from 0 to 42, with higher scores indicating increasing severity.

NIHSS change from baseline to 7 days or discharge will be analyzed using linear
regression model with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted mean
difference and corresponding 95% CI will be reported. Normality assumption for the
residuals will be assessed using Q-Q plot. A win ratio method will be used if
normality assumption is seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be
calculated using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW
approach.

11. SAFETY ANALYSES
Safety analyses will be conducted on the Safety population only.
11.1 SICH Rate within 36 Hours
Proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours post-treatment is considered primary
safety outcome. sICH will be evaluated according to the Heidelberg Bleeding
Classification. Percentage of subjects with sICH within 36 hours after treatment will
be presented for each definition by treatment group. Frequency counts and percentage
of patients within each category will be provided for categorical data.

25

[PDF_PAGE 26]
The generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable will be used to
estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI using the same method
as for the analysis of primary outcome.

11.2 ICH Rate within 36 Hours

ICH within 36 hours post-treatment will be evaluated according to the Heidelberg
Bleeding Classification. Percentage of subjects with ICH within 36 hours after
treatment will be presented for each definition by treatment group. Frequency counts
and percentage of patients within each category will be provided for categorical data.

The generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable will be used to
estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI using the same method
as for the analysis of primary outcome.

11.3 Systemic Bleeding at 90 Days
Systemic bleeding at 90 days, as defined by GUSTO: moderate and severe bleeding.
The proportion of systemic bleeding will be compared by a generalized linear model
with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding
95% CI will be calculated.
11.4 Mortality at 90 Days
Mortality due to any cause is the safety endpoint. The outcome is measured as a
survival time from randomization to the occurrence of death of any cause. With the
date of randomization at day 0, any death occurring on or before calendar day 90 will
be counted as a death. A generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable
will be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI.
11.5 Adverse Events

26

[PDF_PAGE 27]
All adverse events (AEs) will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory
Activities (MedDRA) central coding dictionary. AE severity will be graded according
to National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI
CTCAE V5.0). Adverse events will be summarized using number (%) of patients with
an AE and compared using Chi-square test or Fisher exact test.

11.5.1 Adverse Events

Any adverse change in health or the appearance of or worsening of any undesirable

sign, symptom, or medical condition occurring after enrollment into the trial will be

recorded as AE whether or not it is considered to be related to the study drug. AEs
will be summarized by system organ class (SOC) and preferred term (PT), and will be
presented in descending frequency.

11.5.2 Serious Adverse Events

A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:

Result in death; Are life-threatening or fatal; Require or prolong hospitalization;

Result in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, Constitutes a congenital

anomaly or birth defect, or Significant medical event. SAEs will be summarized by

SOC and PT, and will be presented in descending frequency.

12. REFERENCES

1. DeMets DL, Lan KK. Interim analysis: the alpha spending function approach.
Statistics in medicine 1994;13(13-14):1341-52; discussion 1353-6. (In eng).
DOI: 10.1002/sim.4780131308.

2. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Ringleb PA, et al. Extending thrombolysis to 4-5-9 h and
wake-up stroke using perfusion imaging: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of individual patient data. Lancet (London, England) 2019;394(10193):139-147.
(In eng). DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(19)31053-0.

3. White IR, Horton NJ, Carpenter J, Pocock SJ. Strategy for intention to treat
analysis in randomised trials with missing outcome data. BMJ (Clinical research
ed) 2011;342:d40. (In eng). DOI: 10.1136/bmj.d40.

4. Yelland LN, Sullivan TR, Voysey M, Lee KJ, Cook JA, Forbes AB. Applying

27

[PDF_PAGE 28]
the intention-to-treat principle in practice: Guidance on handling randomisation
errors. Clinical trials (London, England) 2015;12(4):418-23. (In eng). DOI:
10.1177/17407745 15588097.

5. Localio AR, Berlin JA, Ten Have TR, Kimmel SE. Adjustments for center in
multicenter studies: an overview. Annals of internal medicine 2001;135(2):112-
23. (In eng). DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-135-2-200107170-00012.

6. Dmitrienko A, D'Agostino RB, Sr. Multiplicity Considerations in Clinical Trials.
The New England journal of medicine 2018;378(22):2115-2122. (In eng). DOI:
10.1056/NEJMra1709701.

7. Morris TP, Walker AS, Williamson EJ, White IR. Planning a method for
covariate adjustment in individually randomised trials: a practical guide. Trials
2022;23(1):328. (In eng). DOI: 10.1186/s13063-022-06097-z.

8. ‘Young-Saver DF, Gornbein J, Starkman S, Saver JL. Handling of Missing
Outcome Data in Acute Stroke Trials: Advantages of Multiple Imputation Using
Baseline and Postbaseline Variables. Journal of stroke and cerebrovascular
diseases : the official journal of National Stroke Association 2018;27(12):3662-
3669. (In eng). DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.08.040.

9. Churilov L, Arup S, Johns H, et al. An improved method for simple,
assumption-free ordinal analysis of the modified Rankin Scale using
generalized odds ratios. International journal of stroke : official journal of the
International Stroke Society 2014;9(8):999-1005. (In eng). DOT:
10.111 L/ijs.12364.

10. | Wang D, Pocock S. A win ratio approach to comparing continuous non-normal
outcomes in clinical trials. Pharmaceutical statistics 2016;15(3):238-45. (In
eng). DOI: 10.1002/pst.1743.

ll. Wang D, Zheng S, Cui Y, He N, Chen T, Huang B. Adjusted win ratio using the
inverse probability of treatment weighting. Journal of biopharmaceutical
statistics 2025;35(1):21-36. (In eng). DOI: 10.1080/10543406.2023.2275759.

28

[PDF_PAGE 29]
OPTION Statistical Analysis Plan
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN
I@
g

Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-
type Plasminogen Activator (rhTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel

Occlusion in Extended Time Window--A Multicenter, Prospective,

Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint Trial
Prepared by
Yingting Zuo, PhD
Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Duolao Wang, PhD
Global Health Trials Unit, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United
Kingdom
Version: Final version 2.0
Date: June 20, 2025
1

[PDF_PAGE 30]
SAP version history
SAP Version Details of Changes
Approvals by
ae

Prof. Junwei Hao (Chief

Investigator) U2] Jun (

Dr. Yingting Zuo (Trial

Xi-4 ty ve 20/6/2025

Statistician) |

Prof. Duolao Wang (Senior Dolao Wang

Statistician)

2

[PDF_PAGE 31]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS ......... cscs D
2.1 Primary Objective ..........cecseeesseecseesseesseeseeesneeeseesneesneenneceneecaneesneesaeecsneesneesseseneesaneee D
2.2 Secondary Objectives 2... ceceecseecceecsesseessseeeeseesneesneeseneeeneesaeesneesseessneesneessessneesaeeee D
3.1 Primary Efficacy Emd point... .ecseeeseecsecseeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeesneesneessneesseessneeeneeesneesneeeee 8
3.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint «0.0.0.0... cscseecseesseecsessseeeeneeeseesneesneessnessnessssesneesseesaeesee 8
3.3 Exploratory Efficacy Endpoint .............ccccssessecseesseseeseesesseeseessesesnesneesessssnenseesee D
3.4 — Safety Emdpoint 0... ecsecsseseeseesessensesssesessessnssseesesssessesssesessecssnsesseessesscsnsenesse D.
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan .........ccccssesssessseessseessteessseesesssessseessnessssessesssssesssessseesse 9
4.2 Selection of Study Population.........cccccccccsssseeccssssseccssssssnnnsssssssnnssssssneeees LO
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria........cccccssseccssssecsssesesssseecssnnecsssnessssnecssnnecsssnnecsssnecsssneesssnnecssene 10
4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria.........escccseecsesssssseeeseeecneecneeensesseesneesneesnneesneeeeessneeeneeesneeeneees LD
4.3 Method of Treatment Assignment and Randomization..............0....eeeeeeee 12
4.4 Treatment Masking (Blinding)... cesses eeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeneeeeneeeneeeaeteentesneeeseees 13
4.5 Unnterim amalysis 0.0.2... eecceeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeneesneeenneeeneeeaneesneesneessneesneeseeseneeeatessneesneeeeeees 13
6.1 Intention-to-Treat (ITT) Population...............ccseeseseeeeteeeeeeseeesnessneessneessteeseeeeee LS.
6.2 Per-Protocol (PP) Population ...........ccscsscssesssesssessseesssessstecsesssteessessnesssessieesstessseessee LS.
6.3 Safety Population.........cccccccccsssssesecesssssneccecssssnneeesesssssssnesssessssnnessessssssncessessssnees 16
7. GENERAL ISSUES FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS .....cccsescssssseesseeesessstessteessseesee 16
7.1 General Principles .......cccsccccsssssssessssesssssssisecccsssssnnssssesssssssueessssssssnesscsssssssnecssssssssies 16
7.2 Methods for Withdrawals and Missing Data .............cccccssssessecseesseeecseeseessesseesees LT
T.2A Withdrawals .........ccccccecseessesseessessessesseessesessesseessessessessscseessessecseessesessesssesseseeseesee LT
7.2.2 Missing Data .........sesseecseecsessseecsescneeseseesneesssecsneesaecsneseneeesessncessnessneesntessneeeneesene LT
7.3 Data Transformations ...........esecseeeceecsesseeeeeeeeeeeeeneesneeeneeeneesaneesneesnessnessnteseneeeneeseee 1B
7.4 Mulitcemter Data........secsseecseeecsecseeseeeeseeseneeeneeesneesneesaeeenessneesseesneesnnessneesneeseneseneesees 1B
3

[PDF_PAGE 32]
7.6 Covariates......seeceecceecceessecesseesneecneecsneeeneeseneesneesaneesneesusesaneeeneesaeesneessessneesntessneseneesees LQ
7.7 Planned Subgroups.........sscecseecsecsesssessseessteesneesseesnessaeessnesenesssnsesaeessessneesneessneeeseesaee 1D
8. DISPOSITION OF SUBJECTS AND WITHDRAWAL... csccceseseesteeeestenteeeene LO
9. DEMOGRAPHICS AND BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS |... cesessessesseseeseeeneees 20
10.1 Primary Efficacy Analysis .........csccsssesssesssesssssessessesssessseessneesseessisesssenssesssesssessneess 21
10.1.1 Crude AmalySis.....ccccssssssssccssssssnesssccsssssnsesscessssnsseessssssnsnessssssssnnsssssesssssnnsese 22
10.1.2 Covariates Adjusted Amalysis..........ccccsssscssssescessneesssseecssnsecsssncsssneccssnneesssnees 22,
10.1.3 Sensitivity AMALYSIS.........:ccssseccsssseessssseecsssneceesneecsssntecsssnccssnnecsssnecsssnnecsssneesssies 23
10.1.4 Subgroup AMmalySis.........sccccsssecsssssecsssnsecsssneccssnecsssnecsssneessnneessssessssnecsssneeessine 23
10.2 Secondary Efficacy AMAlySis.........ccsscssssescssssessssneccssnecsssnecsssssecsssnecsssneeesssneesssne 24
10.2.1 Ordinal Modified Rankin Scale Score at 90 Days .........-escseeseeseeeeeesneeeneees 24
10.2.2 Modified Rankin Scale Score 0 to 2 at 90 Days ........:.sceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 25
10.2.3 Reperfusion at 24 HOUrS ..........ccccccsseessseesseeecseeseeeeneeesneesaeeesneesnessnessnessatessneesaes 2D,
10.2.4 Infarct Volume at 24 HOUrS.........cccceecseessesssesssessseessteesseessessnessnessneesstessseesaes 2D)
10.2.5 Early Clinical Response at 24 Hour ..........cccccsccsessseesseessessseessteessteesseesseeesees 25
10.2.6 NIHSS Change from Baseline to 7 Days or Discharge..........cecsereeenees 26
10.2.7 EQ-5D-5L at 90 Days .......cccecseesssessssessseesstessssesssesssessssssnecsseesstessssesssesssessseessnesss 20
10.3 Exploratory Efficacy Amalysis..........sccssesssessssssseesssessseesseessessseesstessssesssesssessseessnesss 27
10.3.1 Utility weighted modified Rankin Scale at 90 Days......cccssssssesssesssseseees 27
11.1 SICH Rate within 36 HOUMS..........ccccssssccssssecessnessesneccssneccssnecssssecsssnecsssnecesssneesssns 2B
11.2 Systemic Bleeding at 90 Days .........cccsssccsssescssssecsssseccssnecsssnessssssessssnecsssnessssneesssns 2B
11.3 Mortality at 90 Days... esses esseessseessneesneesnneesnescaseeeneeeaeesneesneessneesneessnessneesees 28
11.4 Adverse Evemts........esseecsessessseessseecsesseneeeseeesneesneesaneesnseeaeeeneesaeesneesnsessnessetssaneesneesees 28
11.4.1 Adverse Evemts........ccsceecseccsesssessssesssessneesneesssessneesaeesnsessessnsesnessnessnsessneesseesses 29)
11.4.2 Serious Adverse Event ..........ccccccsccssssssssssessseessnessstessseessseesseesneesssessneessneesneessns 2D)
4

[PDF_PAGE 33]
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
“Abbreviation ‘Definition =———iti‘“‘s~s*s*”S”S”™”™”™”™CS
“AE——~—«é‘Averseevent s—i—i‘“<“‘<‘<‘< a

Cl Confidence interval

CT Computed tomography

CTP Computed tomography perfusion

CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events

DSMB Data and Safety Monitoring Board

EQ-5D-5L European Quality of Life Five-Dimension Five-Level scale

GEE Generalized estimating equation

GenOR Generalized odds ratio

GUSTO Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen

Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries

IPTW Inverse probability of treatment weighting

mT Intention-to-Treat

IWRS Interactive Web Response System

MR Magnetic resonance

MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities

mRS Modified Rankin Scale

NIHSS National Institute of Health Stroke Scale

PP Per-Protocol

PT Preferred term

thTNK-tPA Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator

RR Risk ratio

SAE Serious adverse event

5

[PDF_PAGE 34]
“SAPs Statistical AnalysisPlan
sICH Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage
Niele System Organ Class
Tmax Time to maximum of the residue function
tPA Tissue plasminogen activator
UW-mRS Utility weighted modified Rankin Scale
6

[PDF_PAGE 35]
1. BACKGROUND

Intravenous Thrombolysis with Recombinant Human TNK Tissue-type Plasminogen
Activator (rhaTNK-tPA) for Acute Non-large Vessel Occlusion in Extended Time
Window--A Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized, Open-label, Blinded Endpoint
Trial (OPTION) is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel,
blinded endpoint, controlled clinical trial to test efficacy and safety of rho TNK-tPA in
patients presenting within 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset who have a non-large
vessel occlusion and evidence of salvageable tissue on their baseline computed
tomography perfusion (CTP).

This Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) describes the statistical methods to be used
for the OPTION. The version of the SAP has been based on the version 1.6 of the
study protocol.

2. STUDY OBJECTIVE

2.1 Primary Objective

The primary objective of OPTION is to evaluate whether treatment with rhTNK-tPA,

administered between 4.5-24 hours after symptom onset can improve neurological

outcome in patients who have a non-large vessel occlusion screened by perfusion

imaging.

2.2 Secondary Objectives

@ = To assess the level of disability (shift analysis of modified Rankin Scale [mRS]
score) at 90 days

@ To assess the proportion of favorable functional outcome (mRS score 0 to 2) at

90 days
@ = To assess the proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 hours (>90% reduction

7

[PDF_PAGE 36]
in time to maximum of the residue function [Tmax] >6s lesion volume by CTP)

@ To assess infarct volume at 24 hours (measured by computed tomography [CT])

@ To assess the proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 hours
(National Institute of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS] drop of >8 from baseline or
NIHSS score of 0 or | at 24 hours)

@ To assess the change of the NIHSS score at 7 days or discharge if earlier from
baseline

@ To assess the quality of life scored by European Quality Five-Dimension Five-
Level (EQ-5D-5L) scale score at 90 days

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of symptomatic
intracranial hemorrhage (sICH) within 36 hours

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of systemic bleeding
(The Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for
Occluded Coronary Arteries [GUSTO]: moderate and severe bleeding) at 90 days

@ To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of mortality at 90
days

3. STUDY ENDPOINTS

3.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Proportion of excellent functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90 days

3.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoint

@ Ordinal mRS score at 90 days

@ Proportion of favorable functional outcome defined as an mRS of 0-2 at 90 days

@ Proportion of patients with reperfusion at 24 hours, defined as >90% reduction in
Tmax >6s lesion volume by CTP

8

[PDF_PAGE 37]
@ Infarct volume at 24 hours, expressed as 24 hours infarct size [by CT]

@ Proportion of patients with early clinical response at 24 hours, defined as a
NIHSS drop of =8 from baseline or NIHSS score of 0 or I

@ NIHSS change from baseline to 7 days/discharge (whichever is earlier)

@ Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-5D-5L) at 90 days

3.4 Exploratory Efficacy Endpoint

© Utility weighted modified Rankin Scale (UW-mRS) at 90 days

3.5 Safety Endpoint

@ Proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours, as defined by Heidelberg
bleeding classification

@ Proportion of systemic bleeding at 90 days, as defined by GUSTO: moderate and
severe bleeding

@ Mortality at 90 days

4. STUDY METHODS

4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan

This is a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, parallel, blinded endpoint,

controlled clinical trial. Patients are randomly assigned to receive rhTNK-tPA or

standard medical treatment in a 1:1 ratio. It is planned to recruit at least 568 patients

in about 40 sites in China. The follow-up period covers the period from the subacute

stage (day 7 or hospital discharge) to the final follow-up examination 83-97 days after

randomization which defines the primary endpoint. The study patient flow outline

following Consort diagram is shown in Figure 1.

9

[PDF_PAGE 38]
xxx Were excluded
‘XXX Not meeting target mismatch profile on CTP
XXX Pro-morid disability wit a pre-stoke modified
Rankin scale (mS) seore> 1
‘XXX Hal large vessel occlusion
XXX No consent obtained
XXX Othe reason
‘XXX Randomized to study inadvertently
XO Allocated to recive eneteplase [XX Allocated to recive standard medial weaiment
XXX Received treatment as randomized XXX Received treatment as randomized
XXX Withdraw consent XXX Withdaw consent
XX Final assesment valable [XX Final asesment valle
XXX Attended 90-day vst XXX Atended 90day vist
=
Figure 1. The study patient flow outline following Consort diagram.
4.2 Selection of Study Population
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria
Clinical inclusion criteria
@ Clinical diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke
@ Age =18 years
@ Pre-stroke mRS score 0-1
@ Disabling stroke defined as follows:

Baseline NIHSS score 6-25 at the time of randomization, or NIHSS 4-5 with
disabling deficit (e.g. hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand function) as determined by
the managing clinician
@ Symptom onset within 4.5-24h (onset time refers to “last-seen well”)

@ Written informed consent from patients or legally responsible representatives
10

[PDF_PAGE 39]
Imaging inclusion criteria

@ Target mismatch profile on CTP defined as an ischemic core volume <50mL, a
mismatch ratio >1.2, and a mismatch volume >10mL

4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria

Clinical exclusion criteria

@ Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or intention to receive
intravenous thrombolysis

© Contraindications to thrombolysis

@ Planned or anticipated treatment with endovascular therapy

@ Rapidly improving symptoms, particularly if in the judgement of the managing
clinician is likely to result ina NIHSS <4 at randomization

@ Pregnancy or lactating; formal testing needed in woman of childbearing potential

@ Cerebral neoplasm (with mass effect)

@ Hereditary or acquired hemorrhagic diathesis, coagulation factor deficiency

@ Impairment in coagulation due to comorbid disease or anticoagulant use. If on
warfarin, international normalized ratio (INR) >1.7 or prothrombin time >15s; if
use of any direct oral anticoagulant within the last 48 hours; if use of
heparin/heparinoid within the last 24 hours

@ Use of glycoprotein IIb/IIla inhibitors within the last 72 hours

@ Baseline platelet count <100,000/uL

@ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe renal insufficiency
with glomerular filtration rate <30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L
(2.5mg/dL)

@ Suspected aortic dissection

@ = Major surgery or biopsy within the last 1 month

1

[PDF_PAGE 40]
@ Any active bleeding or recent bleeding within the last | month, e.g.
gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage

@ Known severe, life-threatening allergy (more severe than skin rash) to contrast
agents

@ Severe, uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >185mmHg or
diastolic blood pressure >110mmHg)

@ Any terminal illness such that the patient would not be expected to survive more
than half a year

@ Current participation in any investigational study that may confound outcome
assessment of the study

@ Any condition that, in the judgement of the investigator, is inappropriate for
participation in the trial or could impose hazards to the patient (e.g. inability to
understand and/or follow the study procedures and/or follow-up due to mental
disorders, cognitive or emotional disorders)

Imaging exclusion criteria

@ = Acute intracranial hemorrhage

@ Acute large vessel occlusion on Magnetic resonance (MR)/CT angiography,
including internal carotid artery, M1, vertebral arteries and basilar artery

4.3 Method of Treatment Assignment and Randomization

Once patients’ eligibility requirements are confirmed, patients are randomized 1:1 to

receive rhTNK-tPA or standard medical treatment through the Interactive Web

Response System (IWRS). The study treatment kit number is also assigned by IWRS

at that time. Patients are treated as soon as possible after randomization. Patients are

considered enrolled in the study once they have provided the informed consent

and been randomized. The patient randomization numbers will be allocated

12

[PDF_PAGE 41]
sequentially in the order in which the patients are randomized. A dynamic
randomization procedure by minimization will be done for achieving a balance of the
following pre-specified factors: occlusion site (anterior or posterior circulation), age
(<65 or 65 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or =16) and center.

4.4 Treatment Masking (Blinding)

Only patient and treating physician are aware of the randomization information. All
endpoints of in-hospital visits will be evaluated by a qualified blind evaluation study
physician who does not know the treatment group. Assessments of primary endpoint
on the mRS will be performed by independent assessors, blinded to the allocated and
actually received treatment. Their assessment will be based on standardized reports of
a telephone interview by trained research personnel who are not aware of treatment
allocation.

4.5 Interim Analysis

Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is in place to monitors patient safety,
treatment efficacy, and study conduct on an ongoing basis. An independent statistician
will prepare summary statistics on enrolment, subject status in the study, baseline
characteristics, and safety data, including summary tables of coded SAEs and these
will be examined by the DSMB.

The original protocol specified that, the safety analyses will occur when the first
100, 200, and 300 patients completed 90-day follow-up. It will be conducted by the
DSMB. If there are concerns about the safety of patients, this board will make a
recommendation to the trial Steering Committee about continuing, stopping, or
modifying the trial. The Haybittle-Peto procedure!” for generating early stopping
boundaries will be used. To compare the safety of the rhnTNK-tPA and standard

13

[PDF_PAGE 42]
medical treatment, primary safety parameters (mortality at 90 days) will be tested. A
recommendation of early termination due to safety reasons will be considered by the
DSMB if the corresponding Haybittle-Peto boundary (P = 0.001, Z =3) at a given
interim analysis is crossed.

One efficacy interim analysis is planned and will be taken place when 50% of the
target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow-up. A Lan-DeMets alpha
spending function* will be used to control for the overall alpha level, using O’Brien
and Fleming boundaries will be used at the interim analysis and final analysis with
alpha of two-sided 0.003, and 0.049.

Due to the fast speed of enrolment, after review with the DSMB in June 2025, the
original interim analysis plan no longer serves its purpose. The efficacy interim
analysis and the third safety interim analysis will be rescinded as per the
recommendation of the DSMB. Since no formal assessment of efficacy is done and no
alpha is spent, we will not adjust the alpha level or p values for the final analysis.

5. SAMPLE SIZE ESTIMATES

In this study, standard medical treatment is set as the control group. The primary
outcome in this study is the occurrence of patients with mRS 0-1 at 90 days. The
sample size is based on the primary outcome.

Based on the reported pooled data‘ of the stroke thrombolysis trials in the
extended time window, we expect a 12% absolute difference in the proportion of
patients reaching the primary outcome between patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and
standard medical treatment (expected rate of excellent functional outcome 50% in
patients treated with rhnTNK-tPA and 38% in patients treated with standard medical
treatment). Considering the potential impact of the one interim efficacy analysis on
the probability of type I error, we adjusted the statistical significance to a two-sided

14

[PDF_PAGE 43]
alpha of 0.049. The total sample size of 568 (n=284 per treatment group) will yield
80% power to detect the specified difference at the two-sided 0.049 significance level,
with a 5% dropout rate.

Due to protocol amendments that eliminated the pre-specified interim efficacy
analysis, this study maintains the original two-sided alpha level of 0.05 and the
planned sample size of 568, with an increased the statistical power of 82.7%.

This estimation was performed based on PASS (NCSS, LLC.) version 15.0.

6. ANALYSIS POPULATIONS

6.1 Intention-to-Treat (ITT) Population

The ITT population®” includes all patients randomized into the trial, even if a patient
does not receive the correct treatment, or does not follow the protocol until
completion. The ITT population will be the primary analysis population for the
efficacy endpoints and patients will be analyzed according to the treatment group to
which they were assigned at randomization.

6.2 Per-Protocol (PP) Population

The PP population is defined as the subset of the ITT population excluding major
protocol violators deemed to have the potential to affect patient outcome in terms of
efficacy.

The PP population includes patients who actually received the assigned treatment
and do not have major protocol violations or deviations. Major protocol violations or
deviations will be identified in a blinded fashion prior to database lock. More
specifically, patients with anyone of the following criteria will be excluded from the
PP population. These deviations will be determined based on the medical monitors’
records, as well as programmatically, using the following criteria at a minimum:

15

[PDF_PAGE 44]
@ Received but did not complete treatment with study drug, or dose of study drug
administered outside recommended dose;

@ = Violate inclusion or exclusion criteria;

@ Administering treatments that seriously interfere with the evaluation of efficacy
after inclusion;

© Missing essential information.

A list of patients to be excluded from the randomized patients to create the PP-
Efficacy analysis will be established and validated by the Steering Committee prior to
unblinding.

6.3 Safety Population

The Safety Population includes all patients who receive any amount of study drug.
Patients will be assigned to the different populations prior to unblinding of the
database. Patients who withdraw informed consent immediately after randomization
and are not to receive any treatment should be excluded from Safety Population. In
case of violation of the randomization scheme, patients will be classified according to
the treatment they actually received. The Safety Population is the safety evaluation
population in this study.

7. GENERAL ISSUES FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

7.1 General Principles

Data were summarized by means and standard deviations, or medians (interquartile
ranges) for continuous variables, and frequency along with percentage for
categorical variables.

All statistical analyses will be performed using SAS Software version 9.4
(SAS Institute) and R version 4.4.1.

16

[PDF_PAGE 45]
7.2 Methods for Withdrawals and Missing Data
7.2.1 Withdrawals
Reasons for missing data will be collected and described, including withdrawal of
consent and loss to follow-up. The reasons for withdrawal of consent and loss to
follow-up will be listed in a summary table. Subjects who don’t complete the 90-day
study but provide at least one post-baseline measure for a specific endpoint will be
included in the analysis.
7.2.2 Missing Data
All efforts should be made to ensure near complete follow-up, with particular focus
on the assessment of primary outcome.
7.2.2.1 Baseline Covariates
Missing baseline covariates will be imputed using simple imputation methods in the
covariate adjusted analysis based on the covariate distributions, should the missing
values for a particular covariate be less than 5%. For a continuous variable, missing
values will be imputed from random values from a normal distribution with mean and
SD calculated from the available sample. For a categorical variable, missing values
will be imputed from random values from a uniform distribution with probabilities Pi,
P2, ..., and Px from the sample.

If the missing values for a covariate are >5% then they will be imputed by the
multiple imputation.
7.2.2.2 Efficacy Outcomes
Missing primary outcome values will be replaced using multiple imputation method.
Logistic regression model with the following covariates: allocated treatment, baseline

17

[PDF_PAGE 46]
age (continuous), baseline NIHSS (continuous), vessel occlusion location (Binary:
[anterior circulation and posterior circulation]), and time from symptom onset to
randomization (continuous) will be used and implemented using SAS PROC MI with
a seed being 224. A total of 5 multiply imputed datasets will be generated to get the
final treatment effect estimate and associated confidence interval (CI) from the
modified Poisson regression model.

Sensitivity analyses based on different hypotheses about the missingness pattern of
the primary outcome will be performed to test for the robustness of the primary analysis
results (see section “Primary Efficacy Analysis”).

7.3 Data Transformations
The analysis of continuous variables may require transformation to normalize the
distributions, but these variables will be mainly analyzed using nonparametric
statistical tests. Decisions to transform the distribution of some variables for analysis
will be taken after the blind review of the data, and before unblinding the treatment
code.
7.4 Mulitcenter Data
In this analysis, the center effect will be considered as a cluster effect in the models in
the sensitivity analysis of the primary outcome’. Centers that enroll few patients will
be pooled together based on the geographic region, hospital tiers, healthcare quality,
and other factors to ensure that the sites or pooled sites have a reasonable sample size
for the statistical analyses (=20 patients for each stratum). This process will be blindly
completed and finalized before the database is locked.
7.5 Multiplicity
Analyses of secondary outcomes, safety outcomes and additional analyses for the

18

[PDF_PAGE 47]
primary outcome are regarded as exploratory in nature, therefore, multiplicity
adjustment will not apply to the primary and secondary outcome analyses*.
7.6 Covariates
In the covariates-adjusted analysis, the following variables will be adjusted.
@ Age (Continuous);
@ Baseline NIHSS score (Continuous);
@ Vessel occlusion location (Binary: [anterior circulation and posterior
circulation]);
@ Time from symptom onset to randomization (Continuous).
If a covariates-adjusted model does not converge, inverse probability of treatment
weighting (IPTW) method? will be used.
7.7 Planned Subgroups
Subgroup analyses will be performed on a few important patient characteristics and
other variables of interest. The predefined subgroups including:
@ Age (<65 years and > 65 years);
@ Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and > 10);
@ = Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);
@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization (4.5-9 hours, 9-24
hours and stroke on awakening);
@ Occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery, M3-M4 segment of middle
cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, and stenosis);
@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and >100 mg/dL);
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure (<140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).
8. DISPOSITION OF SUBJECTS AND WITHDRAWALS
19

[PDF_PAGE 48]
The number of patients for each of the following categories will be summarized by
treatment group.
@ Total number of assessed patients;
@ Number of randomized patients;
@ Number of patients completing the study and not completing the study (grouped
by treatment and main reason);
@ Number of crossover patients;
@ Number of patients included in the ITT population;
@ Number of patients included in the PP population;
@ Number of patients included in the Safety population.
9. DEMOGRAPHICS AND BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Clinically important demographic and disease characteristics at screening will be
summarized with descriptive statistics for each treatment group. Summaries will be
produced for the ITT population and PP population.
If the missing value exceeds 5%, the denominator will be added in the footnote of
the corresponding summary table.
The variables to be summarized include but are not restricted to the following:
@ Age
@ Sex
@ Medical history (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, atrial
fibrillation and prior stroke)
@ Pre stroke onset mRS score
@ Baseline serum glucose
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure
@ Baseline NIHSS score
20

[PDF_PAGE 49]
@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization
@ Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation)
@ Occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery, M3-M4 segment of middle
cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, and stenosis)
@ Baseline serum glucose
@ Baseline systolic blood pressure
10. EFFICACY ANALYSES
Efficacy analyses will be performed using the ITT population with patients grouped
according to treatment assigned at randomization. Available data regardless of
adherence to the protocol will be included in the efficacy analyses. Secondarily, the
same analyses will be repeated on the PP population. All efficacy analyses will
provide the point estimate of treatment effect with associated two-sided 95% CIs.
Visit windows will be derived according to Table 1 and applied for all clinical
efficacy assessments. If there are multiple assessments within the same window, the
one closest to the target time point will be used. Assessments that are outside of the
defined windows will not be used in analysis.
Table 1 Definition of Visit Windows.
10.1 Primary Efficacy Analysis
The primary efficacy outcome is the proportion of excellent functional outcome
defined as an mRS of 0-1 at 90 days. The mRS score is an assessment of disability
21

[PDF_PAGE 50]
with values from 0 (no symptoms at all) to 5 (sever disability) to 6 (death). The mRS
score is collected at 90 days after randomization. If death occurs prior to a scheduled
assessment day, the mRS will be considered available and will be set to 6. Missing
primary outcome will be imputed using multiple imputation method as described in
Section 7.2.2 Missing Data.
10.1.1 Crude Analysis
Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis as follows:

Ho: P mtnk-tpa = Peontrot versus Hi: P entNk-pa # Peontrot
Where P mntnk-+ra and Peontroi are the proportion of mRS score 0 to | at 90 days in the
group treated with rhTNK-tPA and standard medical treatment (control group)
respectively. Superiority of rhoTNK-tPA over standard medical treatment will be
declared if the P-value of the estimated treatment effect is <0.05 (two-sided).

The primary analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will be based on ITT
population, which will be supported by the secondary analysis based on PP
population. The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in the ITT population
using modified Poisson regression!*'? with treatment as the study variable to derive
the risk ratio (RR) and its 95% CI. When there are zero events in one group, an exact
analysis should be performed using PROC FREQ to calculate the risk difference and
its 95% CI. Crude analysis will be the primary analysis to draw the main conclusion
regarding the efficacy of the study intervention.

10.1.2 Covariates Adjusted Analysis

We will also perform adjusted analysis of the primary outcome with adjustment for

the following covariates: age, baseline NIHSS score, vessel occlusion location, and

time from symptom onset to randomization will be used to calculate the adjusted RR.
22

[PDF_PAGE 51]
with 95% CI. Imputation for baseline missing covariates (see description in the

Section 7.2.2) will be made for covariate adjusted analysis.

10.1.3 Sensitivity Analysis

To assess the influence of the missing primary endpoints on the treatment effect

estimate!*, sensitivity analyses will be performed using the same statistical methods as

described in Section 10.1.1, under the different assumptions of the missing outcome

below:

(1) Complete case:

Patients with a missing primary endpoint will be excluded.

(2) Worst-case scenario:

All patients with a missing primary endpoint will be considered as having the worst

mRS score of 6.

(3) Worst-Best scenario:

Patients with a missing primary endpoint in the control group will be considered as a

excellent outcome (mRS 0-1) while patients with a missing primary outcome in

rhTNK-tPA group will be considered as not achieving the excellent outcome (mRS 2-

6).

(4) Assessment of center effect:

A generalized estimating equation (GEE) model with Poisson distribution and log link

function will be fitted to estimate the RR between the intervention and control

treatment with treatment, and the center as a cluster effect.

10.1.4 Subgroup Analysis

Subgroup analysis of the primary endpoint will be performed on the following

subgroup variables, and the RR and its 95% CI will be estimated for each category of
23

[PDF_PAGE 52]
a subgroup variable to assess exploratorily homogeneity of treatment effect by a

subgroup variable.

@ Age (<65 years and > 65 years);

@ Time from symptom onset (last seen well) to randomization (4.5-9 hours, 9-24
hours, and stroke on awakening);

@ Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and > 10);

@ = Vessel occlusion location (anterior circulation and posterior circulation);

© Occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery, M3-M4 segment of middle
cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, and stenosis);

@ Baseline serum glucose (<100 mg/dL and =100 mg/dL);

© Baseline systolic blood pressure (<140 mmHg and >140 mmHg).

Assessment of the homogeneity of treatment effect by a subgroup variable will be
conducted by a modified Poisson model with the treatment, subgroup variable, and
their interaction term as predictors, and the P-value presented for the interaction term.
Subgroup analysis will be performed on both ITT and PP populations.

10.2 Secondary Efficacy Analysis

10.2.1 Ordinal Modified Rankin Scale Score at 90 Days

The secondary efficacy outcome is the ordinal mRS score at 90 days. mRS is an
assessment of disability with values from 0 (no symptoms at all) to 5 (severe
disability); death will be scored as a 6. The distribution of mRS at Day 90 will be
summarized descriptively, and plotted using Grotta bars.

For the analysis of ordinal mRS at 90 days, an ordinal logistic regression model
with treatment as the study variable will be used to calculate the common odds ratio
and corresponding 95% CI between two treatment groups. Prior to its application, the
proportional odds assumption will be tested. If the P-value for the overall score test of

24

[PDF_PAGE 53]
the proportional odds hypothesis is >0.05, the proportional odds assumption will be
deemed acceptable. If the proportional odds hypothesis is rejected, the generalized
odds ratio (GenOR)'* and corresponding 95% CI will be calculated using WINS
package.
10.2.2 Modified Rankin Scale Score 0 to 2 at 90 Days
The mRS score will be used to evaluate the proportion of patients with a score 0 to 2
versus 3 or higher at Day 90. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI
will be calculated by fitting the modified Poisson regression model.
10.2.3 Reperfusion at 24 Hours
Reperfusion at 24 hours, defined as >90% reduction in Tmax >6s lesion volume by
CTP. The proportion of improvement on reperfusion at 24 hours between groups will
be compared by the modified Poisson regression model. The crude and adjusted RR
and corresponding 95% CI will be reported.
10.2.4 Infarct Volume at 24 Hours
Infarct volume at 24 hours will be measured by CT, which will be provided by central
image analysis. Infarct volume at 24 hours between two groups will be tested by
linear regression model with treatment as the study variable. Infarct volume may be
log transformed if necessary. Normality assumption for the residuals will be assessed
using Q-Q plot. The crude and adjusted mean difference/geometric mean ratio and
corresponding 95% CI will be reported. A win ratio method! will be used if
normality assumption is seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be
calculated using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW
approach!°,
10.2.5 Early Clinical Response at 24 Hours

25

[PDF_PAGE 54]
Early clinical response at 24 hours, defined as a NIHSS drop of 28 from baseline or
NIHSS score of 0 or 1. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be
calculated by fitting a modified Poisson regression model.

10.2.6 NIHSS Change from Baseline to 7 Days or Discharge

The NIHSS is a standardized neurological examination score, with scores ranging
from 0 to 42, with higher scores indicating increasing severity.

NIHSS change from baseline to 7 days or discharge will be analyzed using linear
regression model with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted mean
difference and corresponding 95% CI will be reported. Normality assumption for the
residuals will be assessed using Q-Q plot. A win ratio method will be used if
normality assumption is seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be
calculated using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW
approach.

10.2.7 EQ-5D-5L at 90 Days

The EQ-5D-5SL is a tool for describing and assessing health-related quality of life 90
days after randomization. The tool is designed for self-completion. The EQ-5D-5L
will be completed on the 90 days after randomization.

Total score on EQ-5D-5L" will be analyzed using linear regression model with
treatment as the study variable. Total score on EQ-5D-5L may be log transformed if
necessary. Normality assumption for the residuals will be assessed using Q-Q plot.
The crude and adjusted mean difference/geometric mean ratio and corresponding 95%
CI will be reported. A win ratio method will be used if normality assumption is
seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be calculated using WINS
package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW approach.

26

[PDF_PAGE 55]
10.3 Exploratory Efficacy Analysis
10.3.1 Utility weighted modified Rankin Scale at 90 Days
The mRS is an ordinal disability score range from 0 (no symptoms) to 6 (death).
However, the difference between any two points on the scale is not linearly
proportional to the difference in the “value” that humans assign to their corresponding
degrees of disability. The UW-mRS is derived by averaging values from previous
studies using time-tradeoff methodology in stroke survivors and person-tradeoff
methodology in healthcare providers!’. For purposes of weighted mRS analysis, each
mRS category will be assigned a numerical value representing its clinical utility, as
follows:

Table 2 Weights Used for mRS score at 90 days
a
Pram fost ore fous fos foo

The following weights are assigned to scores 0 through 6 on the modified Rankin
scale: 1.0, 0.91, 0.76, 0.65, 0.33, 0, and 0, respectively. The UW-mRS ranges from 0
(death) to 1 (no symptoms or disability). These utility weights have been used
previously in trials on ischemic stroke!??”.

The UW-mRS at 90 days between two groups will be compared using linear
regression model with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted mean
difference with their corresponding 95% CIs will be reported. If normality assumption
is not met, a win ratio method will be used. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be
calculated using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW
approach.

11. SAFETY ANALYSES
27

[PDF_PAGE 56]
Safety analyses will be conducted on the Safety population only.

11.1 SICH Rate within 36 Hours

Proportion of patients with sICH within 36 hours post-treatment is considered primary
safety outcome. sICH will be evaluated according to the Heidelberg Bleeding
Classification. Percentage of subjects with sICH within 36 hours after treatment will
be presented for each definition by treatment group. Frequency counts and percentage
of patients within each category will be provided for categorical data.

The modified Poisson regression model with treatment as the study variable will
be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI using the
same method as for the analysis of primary outcome.

11.2 Systemic Bleeding at 90 Days
Systemic bleeding at 90 days, as defined by GUSTO: moderate and severe bleeding.
The proportion of systemic bleeding will be compared by a modified Poisson
regression model with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted RR and
corresponding 95% CI will be calculated.
11.3 Mortality at 90 Days
Mortality due to any cause is the safety endpoint. The outcome is measured as a
survival time from randomization to the occurrence of death of any cause. With the
date of randomization at day 0, any death occurring on or before calendar day 90 will
be counted as a death. A modified Poisson regression model with treatment as the
study variable will be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding
95% CI.
11.4 Adverse Events

28

[PDF_PAGE 57]
All adverse events (AEs) will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory

Activities (MedDRA) central coding dictionary. AE severity will be graded according

to National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI

CTCAE V5.0). Adverse events will be summarized using number (%) of patients with

an AE and compared using Chi-square test or Fisher exact test.

11.4.1 Adverse Events

Any adverse change in health or the appearance of or worsening of any undesirable

sign, symptom, or medical condition occurring after enrollment into the trial will be

recorded as AE whether or not it is considered to be related to the study drug. AEs

will be summarized by system organ class (SOC) and preferred term (PT), and will be

presented in descending frequency.

11.4.2 Serious Adverse Events

A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:

Result in death; Are life-threatening or fatal; Require or prolong hospitalization;

Result in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, Constitutes a congenital

anomaly or birth defect, or Significant medical event. SAEs will be summarized by

SOC and PT, and will be presented in descending frequency.

12. REFERENCES

1. Haybittle JL. Repeated assessment of results in clinical trials of cancer treatment.
The British journal of radiology 1971;44(526):793-7. (In eng). DOI:
10.1259/0007-1285-44-526-793.

2. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical
trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. I. Introduction and design.
British journal of cancer 1976;34(6):585-612. (In eng). DOI:
10.1038/bjc.1976.220.

3. DeMets DL, Lan KK. Interim analysis: the alpha spending function approach.
Statistics in medicine 1994;13(13-14):1341-52; discussion 1353-6. (In eng).
DOI: 10.1002/sim.4780131308.

4. Campbell BCV, Ma H, Ringleb PA, et al. Extending thrombolysis to 4-5-9 h and

29

[PDF_PAGE 58]
wake-up stroke using perfusion imaging: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of individual patient data. Lancet (London, England) 2019;394(10193):139-147.
(In eng). DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(19)31053-0.

5. White IR, Horton NJ, Carpenter J, Pocock SJ. Strategy for intention to treat
analysis in randomised trials with missing outcome data. BMJ (Clinical research
ed) 2011;342:d40. (In eng). DOL: 10.1136/bmj.d40.

6. Yelland LN, Sullivan TR, Voysey M, Lee KJ, Cook JA, Forbes AB. Applying
the intention-to-treat principle in practice: Guidance on handling randomisation
errors. Clinical trials (London, England) 2015;12(4):418-23. (In eng). DOI:
10.1177/17407745 15588097.

7. Localio AR, Berlin JA, Ten Have TR, Kimmel SE. Adjustments for center in
multicenter studies: an overview. Annals of internal medicine 2001;135(2):112-
23. (In eng). DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-135-2-200107170-00012.

8. Dmitrienko A, D'Agostino RB, Sr. Multiplicity Considerations in Clinical Trials.
The New England journal of medicine 2018;378(22):2115-2122. (In eng). DOI:
10.1056/NEJMra1709701.

9. Morris TP, Walker AS, Williamson EJ, White IR. Planning a method for
covariate adjustment in individually randomised trials: a practical guide. Trials
2022;23(1):328. (In eng). DOI: 10.1186/s13063-022-06097-z.

10. Spiegelman D, Hertzmark E. Easy SAS calculations for risk or prevalence ratios
and differences. American journal of epidemiology 2005;162(3):199-200. (In
eng). DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwil88.

ll. Petersen MR, Deddens JA. A comparison of two methods for estimating
prevalence ratios. BMC medical research methodology 2008;8:9. (In eng). DOI:
10.1186/1471-2288-8-9.

12. Zou G. A modified poisson regression approach to prospective studies with
binary data. American journal of epidemiology 2004;159(7):702-6. (In eng).
DOT: 10.1093/aje/kwh090.

13, Young-Saver DF, Gornbein J, Starkman S, Saver JL. Handling of Missing
Outcome Data in Acute Stroke Trials: Advantages of Multiple Imputation Using
Baseline and Postbaseline Variables. Journal of stroke and cerebrovascular
diseases : the official journal of National Stroke Association 2018;27(12):3662-
3669. (In eng). DOT: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.08.040.

14. Churilov L, Arnup S, Johns H, et al. An improved method for simple,
assumption-free ordinal analysis of the modified Rankin Scale using
generalized odds ratios. International journal of stroke : official journal of the
International Stroke Society 2014;9(8):999-1005. (In eng). DOI:
10.111 1/ijs.12364.

15. Wang D, Pocock S. A win ratio approach to comparing continuous non-normal
outcomes in clinical trials. Pharmaceutical statistics 2016;15(3):238-45. (In
eng). DOI: 10.1002/pst.1743.

16. | Wang D, Zheng S, Cui Y, He N, Chen T, Huang B. Adjusted win ratio using the
inverse probability of treatment weighting. Journal of biopharmaceutical
statistics 2025;35(1):21-36. (In eng). DOT: 10.1080/10543406.2023.2275759.

17. Luo N, Liu G, Li M, Guan H, Jin X, Rand-Hendriksen K. Estimating an EQ-
5D-5L Value Set for China. Value in health : the journal of the International
Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research 2017;20(4):662-669.
(In eng). DOT: 10.1016/j.jval.2016.11.016.

18. Chaisinanunkul N, Adeoye O, Lewis RJ, et al. Adopting a Patient-Centered

30

[PDF_PAGE 59]
Approach to Primary Outcome Analysis of Acute Stroke Trials Using a Utility-
Weighted Modified Rankin Scale. Stroke 2015;46(8):2238-43. (In eng). DOI:
10.1161/strokeaha.114,008547.

19, Nogueira RG, Jadhav AP, Haussen DC, et al. Thrombectomy 6 to 24 Hours after
Stroke with a Mismatch between Deficit and Infarct. The New England journal
of medicine 2018;378(1):11-21. (In eng). DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1 706442.

20. Broderick JP, Adeoye O, Elm J. Evolution of the Modified Rankin Scale and Its
Use in Future Stroke Trials. Stroke 2017;48(7):2007-2012. (In eng). DOI:
10.1161/strokeaha.117.017866.

21. Adeoye O, Broderick J, Derdeyn CP, et al. Adjunctive Intravenous Argatroban
or Eptifibatide for Ischemic Stroke. The New England journal of medicine
2024;391(9):810-820. (In eng). DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa23 14779.

22. Mistry EA, Hart KW, Davis LT, et al. Blood Pressure Management After
Endovascular Therapy for Acute Ischemic Stroke: The BEST-II Randomized
Clinical Trial. Jama —-2023;330(9):821-831. (In _— eng). ~— DOT:
10.1001/jama.2023.14330.

3

[PDF_PAGE 60]
SAP amendments between original version (December 24", 2022) to final version (June 20", 2025)
Revisions Original version 1.0 Final version 2.0
(Location) December 24" 2022 June 20" 2025
Version Number/Date | Version: Original version 1.0, December 24, 2022 Version: Final version 2.0, June 20, 2025
fae Pe |
2.2 Secondary Objectives | @ To assess infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured | @ To assess infarct volume at 24 hours (measured by computed
by computed tomography [CT] at 24 hours) and baseline infarct tomography [CT])
volume (rCBF<30% by CTP) © To assess the quality of life scored by European Quality Five-
Dimension Five-Level (EQ-SD-SL) scale score at 90 days
© To assess the safety of the two treatment regimens in terms of
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) within 36 hours © Remove
3.2 Secondary Efficacy | @ — Infarct growth between final infarct volume (measured by CT at24 | @ Infarct volume at 24 hours, expressed as 24 hours infarct size [by
Endpoint hours) and baseline infarct volume (1CBF<30% by CTP) ct
© Functional health status and quality of life (EQ-SD-SL) at 90
days
3.3 Exploratory Efficacy © Utility weighted modified Rankin Seale (UW-mRS) at 90 days
fie ini |
3.4 Safety Endpoint © Proportion of patients with ICH within 36 hours, as defined by | @ — Remove
powers kewaiaase |e
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria | @ — Baseline NIHSS score 4-25 © Disabling stroke defined as follows:
Baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score 6-
25 at the time of randomization, Or NIHSS 4-5 with disabling deficit
(e.g. hemianopia, aphasia, loss of hand function) as determined by the
managing clinician
4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria | @ — Known severe renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate | @ Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe
<30mL/min or serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.Smg/dL) renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate <30mL/min or
32

[PDF_PAGE 61]
© Undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; known severe serum creatinine >220mmol/L (2.5mg/dL)
adverse reactions to contrast agents
© © Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours or
© Treatment with a thrombolytic within the last 72 hours intention to receive intravenous thrombolysis
© Hypodensity on non-contrast CT or MRI estimated to be >1/3 | @ — Remove
MCA territory

4.3 Method of Treatment | A dynamic randomization procedure by minimization will be done for | A dynamic randomization procedure by minimization will be done for

Assignment and | achieving a balance of the following pre-specified factors: age (<65 or | achieving a balance of the following pre-specified factors: vessel

Randomization 265 years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or =16) and center. occlusion location (anterior or posterior circulation), age (<65 or >65

years), baseline NIHSS (<16 or 216) and center.

45 Interim Analysis One efficacy interim analysis is planned and will be taken place when | The original protocol specified that, the safety analyses will occur
50% of the target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day follow- | when the first 100, 200, and 300 patients completed 90-day follow-up.
up. A Lan-DeMets alpha spending function will be used to control for | It will be conducted by the DSMB. If there are concems about the
the overall alpha level, using O’Brien and Fleming boundaries will be | safety of patients, this board will make a recommendation to the trial
used at the interim analysis and final analysis with alpha of two-sided | Steering Committee about continuing, stopping, or modifying the trial.
0.003, and 0.049, The Haybittle-Peto procedure for generating early stopping boundaries

will be used. To compare the safety of the rhTNK-tPA and standard
medical treatment, primary safety parameters (mortality at 90 days)
will be tested. A recommendation of early termination due to safety
reasons will be considered by the DSMB if the corresponding
Haybittle-Peto boundary (P= 0.001, Z =3) at a given interim analysis
is crossed.

One efficacy interim analysis is planned and will be taken place when
50% of the target sample size (284 cases) have completed 90-day
follow-up. A Lan-DeMets alpha spending function will be used to

33

[PDF_PAGE 62]
control for the overall alpha level, using O'Brien and Fleming
boundaries will be used at the interim analysis and final analysis with
alpha of two-sided 0.003, and 0.049.

Due to the fast speed of enrolment, after review with the DSMB in
June 2025, the original interim analysis plan no longer serves its
purpose. The efficacy interim analysis and the third safety interim
analysis will be rescinded as per the recommendation of the DSMB.
Since no formal assessment of efficacy is done and no alpha is spent,
we will not adjust the alpha level or P values for the final analysis.

5. Sample Size Estimates ‘Add: Due to protocol amendments that eliminated the pre-specified
interim efficacy analysis, this study maintains the original two-sided
alpha level of 0.05 and the planned sample size of 568, with an
increased the statistical power of 82.7%.

6.1 Intention-to-Treat | The ITT population includes all patients who were randomized, received | The ITT population includes all patients randomized into the trial, even

(ITT) Population at least one-day treatment of study drugs, had baseline important data, | if'a patient does not receive the correct treatment, or does not follow

and had at least one assessment of the primary efficacy evaluation. the protocol until completion.

72.22 Efficacy | Missing primary outcome values will be replaced using mixed | Missing primary outcome values will be replaced using multiple

Outcomes imputation method imputation method. Logistic regression model with the following

© Ifthe patient discontinued treatment early due to a negative event | covariates: allocated treatment, baseline age (continuous), baseline
(cg., adverse event, disease progression, or death), their 90-day | NIHSS (continuous), vessel occlusion location (Binary: [anterior
mRS score will be imputed as >1 circulation and posterior circulation), and time from symptom onset
© If the patient completed treatment but withdrew from follow-up | to randomization (continuous) will be used and implemented using
early due to a negative event (e.g., adverse event or death), their | SAS PROC MI with a seed being 224, A total of S multiply imputed
90-day mRS score will also be imputed as >1 datasets will be generated to get the final treatment effect estimate and
© Forall other cases, the last available post-treatment mRS score will | associated confidence interval (CI) from the modified Poisson
be used to classify the missing 90-day mRS score as <I or>1. __| regression model.
34

[PDF_PAGE 63]
7.7 Planned Subgroups] @ — Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and > 16) © Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and > 10)
© Medium vessel occlusion site (M2-M4 segment of middle cerebral | @ — Occlusion site (M2-M4 segment of middle cerebral artery,
artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery) anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, and stenosis)
10.1.1 Crude Analysis | Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis as | Analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will test the hypothesis as
follows: follows:
Ho: P mitnkra - Peontol <A versus Hi: Pritnkpa - Peontrol> A Ho: PritNkpa = Peontrot versus Hi; P ritNkara # Peontrol
Where Pasrvirs and Peonist are the proportion of mRS score 0 to 1 at 90 | Where Pyyrxina and Pesan are the proportion of mRS score 0 to I at
days in the group treated with rhTNK-PA and standard medical | 90 days in the group treated with rhTNK-tPA and standard medical
treatment (control group) respectively, with a superiority margin of 0. If | treatment (control group) respectively. Superiority of thTNK-tPA over
the lower limit of 95% confidence interval bound exceeds margin, | standard medical treatment will be declared if the P-value of the
indicating that the treatment group is superior to the control group. estimated treatment effect is <0.05 (two-sided).
‘The primary analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will be based on | The primary analysis of the primary efficacy outcome will be based on
ITT population, which will be supported by the secondary analysis based | ITT population, which will be supported by the secondary analysis
on PP population. The hypothesis of primary outcome will be tested in | based on PP population. The hypothesis of primary outcome will be
the ITT population using generalized linear model with treatment as the | tested in the ITT population using modified Poisson regression10-12
study variable to derive the risk ratio (RR) and its 95% CI. Crude | with treatment as the study variable to derive the risk ratio (RR) and
analysis will be the primary analysis to draw the main conclusion | its 95% CI. Crude analysis will be the primary analysis to draw the
regarding the efficacy of the study intervention. main conclusion regarding the efficacy of the study intervention,
10.1.4 Subgroup | @ — Baseline NIHSS score (<16 and > 16) © Baseline NIHSS score (<10 and > 10)
Analysis © — Medium vessel occlusion site (M2-M4 segment of middle cerebral | @ — Occlusion site (M2 segment of middle cerebral artery, M3-Md
artery, anterior cerebral artery, and posterior cerebral artery) segment of middle cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery,
posterior cerebral artery, and stenosis)
10.2.2 Modified Rankin | The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be calculated | The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be
35

[PDF_PAGE 64]
SS
10.2.3 Reperfusion at 24 | The proportion of improvement on reperfusion at 24 hours between | The proportion of improvement on reperfusion at 24 hours between
Hours groups will be compared by the generalized linear model. The crude and | groups will be compared by the modified Poisson regression model

adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be reported. The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be
reported,

10.2.4 Infarct Growth | Infaret growth between final infract volume at 24 hours and baseline | Infarct volume at 24 hours will be measured by CT, which will be
infarct volume, which will be provided by central image analysis. Infarct | provided by central image analysis. Infarct volume at 24 hours
growth between two groups will be tested by linear regression model | between two groups will be tested by linear regression model with
with treatment as the study variable. Infarct growth may be log | treatment as the study variable. Infarct volume may be log transformed
transformed if necessary. ifnecessary.

10.2.5 Early Clinical | The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be calculated | The crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be

10.2.7 EQ-SD-SL at 90 The EQ-SD-SL is a tool for describing and assessing health-related

days quality of life 90 days after randomization, The tool is designed for

self-completion, The EQ-SD-SL will be completed on the 90 days after
randomization.

Total score on EQ-SD-SL17 will be analyzed using linear regression
model with treatment as the study variable, Total score on EQ-SD-5L
may be log transformed if necessary. Normality assumption for the
residuals will be assessed using Q-Q plot. The crude and adjusted mean
difference/geometric mean ratio and corresponding 95% CI will be
reported, A win ratio method will be used if normality assumption is,
seriously violated. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be calculated
using WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using
IPTW approach.

[ios Rin fy Ra Sse De
36

[PDF_PAGE 65]
Efficacy Analysis ‘The mRS is an ordinal disability seore range from 0 (no symptoms) to
6 (death). However, the difference between any two points on the scale
is not linearly proportional to the difference in the “value” that
humans assign to their corresponding degrees of disability. The UW-
mRS is derived by averaging values from previous studies using time-
tradeoff methodology in stroke survivors and person-tradeoff
methodology in healtheare providers. For purposes of weighted mRS
analysis, each mRS category will be assigned a numerical value
representing its clinical utility, as follows:

Table 2 Weights Used for mRS score at 90 days
ee
[Rew [7 [oor fare [aor for [oe |
The following weights are assigned to scores 0 through 6 on the
modified Rankin scale: 1.0, 0.91, 0.76, 0.65, 0.33, 0, and 0,
respectively. The UW-mRS ranges from 0 (death) to 1 (no symptoms
or disability). These utility weights have been used previously in trials
on ischemic stroke.

The UW-mRS at 90 days between two groups will be compared using
linear regression model with treatment as the study variable. The crude
and adjusted mean difference with their corresponding 95% CIs will
be reported. If normality assumption is not met, a win ratio method
will be used. Crude and adjusted win ratio will be calculated using
WINS package. Adjusted win ratio will be calculated using IPTW
approach.

37

[PDF_PAGE 66]
11.1 SICH Rate within 36 ] The generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable will | Remove
Hours be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95%
Clusing the same method as for the analysis of primary outcome.
11.2 ICH Rate within 36 ICH within 36 hours post-treatment will be evaluated according to the
Hours Heidelberg Bleeding Classification, Percentage of subjects with ICH
within 36 hours after treatment will be presented for each definition by
treatment group. Frequency counts and percentage of patients within
each category will be provided for categorical data,
The generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable will
be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95%
Cl using the same method as for the analysis of primary outcome.
11.3 Systemic Bleeding | The proportion of systemic bleeding will be compared by a generalized | The proportion of systemic bleeding will be compared by a modified
at 90 Days linear model with treatment as the study variable. The crude and adjusted | Poisson regression model with treatment as the study variable. The
RR and corresponding 95% Cl will be calculated. crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI will be calculated.
11.4 Mortality at 90 Days | A generalized linear model with treatment as the study variable will be | A modified Poisson regression model with treatment as the study
used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and corresponding 95% CI. | variable will be used to estimate the crude and adjusted RR and
corresponding 95% Cl
38
