Appendix 2

                    ROSE-TNK Protocol

The  MRI-guided  thrOmbolysis  for  Stroke  bEyond  Time
Window  by  TNK  (ROSE-TNK):  a                  phase  2,    randomized,
multicenter trial

Chief investigator: Prof. Hui-Sheng Chen,

                      Department of Neurology,

                      General Hospital of Northern Theater Command,

                      No.83 Wenhua Rd, Shenyang 110840, China

                      Tel: 86-24-28897511

                      E-mail: chszh@aliyun.com

Ethics committee of    General Hospital of Northern Theater Command

approval No. Y(2020)067

Protocol version and date: Version 1.0, 17th February 2021

                                      1

Abstract
Rationale: Recent studies have demonstrated the benefit of intravenous alteplase for
acute ischemic stroke (AIS) beyond the time window of 4.5 hours, but                     the effect of

intravenous tenecteplase (TNK) in AIS patients with the extended time window is not
well demonstrated.

Aim: To explore the efficacy and safety of intravenous TNK in AIS patients within 4.5
to 24 hours of onset by neuroimaging guiding.
Methods     and    Design:    In this   phase 2, multicenter, open-label, blinded-endpoint,

randomized, control trial, eligible AIS patients within 4.5 to 24 hours of symptom onset
and a mismatch between           diffusion-weighted imaging  (DWI)  and fluid  attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) were randomly assigned (1:1) into TNK group, and control

group only receiving stand stroke care.
Study   Outcomes: The primary            efficacy   outcome is excellent functional outcome,

defined as modified Rankin Scale score 0 to 1 at 90 days. The primary safety outcome
is symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage.

Keywords: tenecteplase, acute ischemic stroke, protocol

                                                   2

Introduction
Currently, the guideline recommended intravenous alteplase as one of the most effective
treatment for acute ischemic stroke           (AIS)   within 4.5 hours of onset.1        Tenecteplase

(TNK)  is  a  genetic  variant  of  alteplase  with  higher  fibrin  specificity,  greater
conservation  of  fibrinogen,  greater  resistance  to  inhibitors  of  tissue  plasminogen
activator,  more  rapid  thrombolysis,  and  longer  half-life.2             Accumulating       studies

demonstrated the noninferiority of TNK to alteplase in intravenous thrombolysis                       to
treat AIS within 4.5 hours after symptom onset.3,4 Beyond the time window of 4.5 hours,

two neuroimage-based screening randomized studies (WAKE-UP and EXTEND) also
demonstrated the benefit of intravenous alteplase for AIS within the extended time
window.5,6 Two prospective, non-randomized studies with small sample suggested the

feasibility of intravenous TNK for AIS within 4 to 24 hours after onset based on the
neuroimaging selection.7,8 To date, no randomized studies are found to report the effect

of intravenous TNK in stroke patients beyond 4.5 hours of symptom onset.
   In this context, this prospective, randomized, blinded-endpoint assessment, multi-
center trial was conducted to explore the efficacy and safety of intravenous TNK for

MRI-guided AIS within 4.5 to 24 hours of symptom onset.

Methods
Design
   The MRI-guided thrOmbolysis for Stroke bEyond Time Window by TNK (ROSE-

TNK) is a phase 2, prospective, multicenter, open-label, blinded-endpoint, randomized
control study to assess the efficacy and safety of intravenous TNK for MRI-guided AIS

within 4.5 to 24 hours of symptom onset.
Intervention

   In this trial, eligible patients will be randomly assigned (1:1) using a computer-
generated randomization sequence with  block size of four and sealed  envelopes,
prepared by an independent statistician, into either TNK group receiving intravenous

TNK  (0.25mg/kg,  a  maximum  of  25  mg)               as  a  single  bolus  over  5-10  seconds
immediately after randomization., or control group only receiving standard stroke care
                                                    3

(Figure 1). Both patients will be treated according to AHA/ASA guidelines for early
management of ischemic stroke.1

Figure 1. Study schema

TNK: tenecteplase. mRS: modified Rankin Scale. NIHSS: National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale.

Patient Population
   A total of 80 patients with acute moderate ischemic stroke in ten centers are expected

in  China  between      January     2021   and   March     2022.  There  are      40  subjects  in  the
experimental group and control group, respectively. The detailed inclusion/exclusion

criteria are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. The Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria

  Inclusion criteria:

  1)    Patient age: 18 - 80 years;

  2)    Acute ischemic stroke confirmed by CT or MRI;

  3)    The time from onset to treatment: 4.5 - 24 h;

  4)    NIHSS: 6-25, or NIHSS score ≤ 5 but responsible vessel occlusion or severe
        stenosis on CTA/MRA;

  5)    Imaging requirements: (a) DWI infarct region: no more than 1/3 of middle
        cerebral artery territory or 1/2 of the anterior cerebral artery territory or 1/2 of the
                                                    4

       posterior cerebral artery territory; (b) DWI infarct volume <70 ml; (c) presence
       of DWI/FLAIR mismatch: DWI high signal and FLAIR visually normal;

  6)   First stroke onset or past stroke without obvious neurological deficit (mRS≤1);

  7)   Signed  informed  consent  from  the  patients,  or  their  legally  authorized
       representative.

  Exclusion criteria:
  1)   Planned endovascular treatment;

  2)   Serious neurological deficits before onset (mRS≥2);

  3)   Obvious head injuries or strokes within 3 months;

  4)   Subarachnoid or intracranial hemorrhage;

  5)   History of intracranial hemorrhage;

  6)   Intracranial tumor, arteriovenous malformation or aneurysm;

  7)   Intracranial or spinal cord surgery within 3 months;

  8)   Arterial puncture at a noncompressible site within the previous seven days;

  9)   Active internal hemorrhage;
  10) Coagulation abnormalities: platelet count of <100000/mm3;

  11) Aortic arch dissection;

  12) Heparin therapy within 24 hours;

  13) Infective endocarditis;

  14) Oral  warfarin  is  being  taken  and  INR>1.6  or  APTT  abnormal;  oral
       anticoagulation therapy;

  15) Systolic pressure ≥185 mmHg or diastolic pressure ≥110 mmHg;

  16) Blood glucose < 50 mg/dl (2.7mmol/L);

  17) Pregnancy;

  18) Neurological deficit after epileptic seizures;

  19) Major surgery within 1 month;

  20) Gastrointestinal or urinary tract hemorrhage within the previous 30 days;

  21) Myocardial infarction within 3 months; allergy to study drugs;

  22) Contradictory to MRI examination;

                                             5

  23)   MRI image not qualified for evaluation;

  24)   Other serious illness;

  25)   Participating in other clinical trials within 3 months;

  26)   Patients not suitable for this clinical study considered by researcher.

CT:   Computed      tomography;  MRI:        Magnetic resonance imaging;  CTA:               Computed
tomographic angiography; MRA: Magnetic resonance arteriography; DWI: Diffusion
Weighted Imaging;        FLAIR: Fluid attenuated inversion recovery;              INR:    International

normalized ratio; APTT: Activated partial thromboplastin time; mRS: modified Rankin
Scale; NIHSS: National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale.

Standard Protocol Approvals, Registrations, and Patient Consents
   The trial was registered on clinicaltrial.gov (NCT04752631). The protocol and data

collection of the trial have been approved by the ethics committee of General Hospital
of  Northern  Theater  Command            and  all  participating  sites.  All  subjects  or  their

representatives will provide written informed consents before inclusion into the trial.

Data Collection and Follow-up
   Demography and clinically relevant data are recorded at the time of entry into the
study.   At   baseline,   demographic   characteristics,   routine   laboratory   tests,   and

neuroimaging will be collected and NIHSS and mRS will be evaluated. NIHSS scoring
will be assessed at 24      ±    4 hours, 48 ± 8 hours, 7        ±   1 days, and 14 ± 2 days, and
mRS will be assessed at 90 ± 7 days. All clinical assessments including NIHSS and

mRS were evaluated by certified assessors according to a standardized procedure
manual in each study center.          90-day   mRS will be evaluated by face-to-face or by

telephone  interview      (if  a  face-to-face  interview  was  not  possible).  Concomitant
medications and adverse events within 90 days after randomization will be recorded in
detail by investigators and adjudicated by certified assessors.

Outcomes

                                                    6

   The primary     endpoint    was an excellent function         outcome, which was        defined as

modified Rankin Scale score 0           to 1 at 90 days. The secondary           endpoints included
favorable function outcome, defined as modified Rankin Scale score 0 to 2 at 90 days,

distribution of mRS at 90 days, changes in NIHSS at 24 hours and 7 days, and early
neurological improvement         (ENI),   defined as more than 4 point decrease in NIHSS
within 24 hours.9

   Prespecified safety outcomes included symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage (sICH)
within 48 hours, defined as an increase in the NIHSS score of ≥4 points as a result of
the intracranial hemorrhage,10        proportion of parenchymal hemorrhage (PH1, PH2)

within  48  hours,10     proportion  of  hemorrhagic  transformation  within  7  days,  any

bleeding events within 7 days, and mortality within 14 days.

Quality Control
   Before the beginning of the study, all the investigators at each center attended

training  sessions  to  review  the  protocol  and  procedures.             An  independent        Data
Monitoring Committee (DMC) will perform to assure fidelity of conduct of the study
according to the protocol and Good Clinical Practice (GCP). The primary purpose of

the termination is to protect the rights and interests of the subjects and to avoid
unnecessary economic losses. If the therapy shows a statistically significant difference

of efficacy and/or safety over the other, the DMC has the right to terminate the study
unconditionally.

Data Management and Monitoring
Data will be stored in the case report form (CRF). DMC is established to ensure ongoing

monitoring of data security, such as hemorrhagic events and other adverse events, etc.
Clinical outcome events (stroke, death, intracerebral hemorrhage,                  etc.) will also   be

adjudicated by     the  independent     DMC.     All neuroimaging will be sent to the central
reader who are blinded to treatment assignment (Y.J.D.).

All AEs Monitoring
   All information about AEs should be recorded on the AEs page of the case report.
                                                   7

All relevant SAEs are reviewed and adjudicated centrally in order to ensure that they

meet the same diagnostic criteria.

Sample Size Determination
   No formal sample size calculation was performed due to no relevant data from
previous trial. For this exploratory trial, the sample size (40 patients per group) was

determined after discussion with the Steer Committee.

Statistical Analysis
   All efficacy analyses will be performed according to the intention-to-treat principle,
which comprises patients who received the allocated treatment and completed the

assessment period. Baseline characteristics and procedural details will be compared
with Student’s t test if normally distributed or rank sum test if non-normally distributed.

Treatment effect will be presented as odds ratio (95% CI) of TNK group versus control
group, analyzed by binary logistic regression. The primary and secondary outcomes
such as mRS (0-2) at 90 days, occurrence of ENI, proportion of sICH within 48 hours,

proportion of parenchymal hemorrhage              within 48 hours, proportion of hemorrhagic
transformation within 7 days, any bleeding events within 7 days, and mortality within

14 days    will be estimated using a binary logistic regression adjusted for                  age, sex,
systolic blood pressure, stroke history, NIHSS score at admission and time from stroke
onset to randomization. Change in NIHSS score between two groups will be compared

using a generalized linear model. Shift analysis of the mRS scores at 90 days will be
performed using ordinal logistic regression. Descriptive statistics of proportions will be

used for the safety data. Continuous data are presented as mean (standard deviation) or
median (interquartile range) as appropriate. For categorical variables, absolute and

relative frequencies are presented. there is statistical significance if P value < 0.05.
Analyses will be performed with statistical software of IBM SPSS version 20.

Study Organization and Funding
   The protocol was designed by Hui-Sheng Chen and discussed by the academic team.
                                                    8

Steering Committee is made up of external scientific advisors, and will monitor the

research  and  data  regularly.        The  trial  is  initiated  by  Cerebrovascular  Disease
Collaboration & Innovation Alliance (CDCIA) of Liaoning, and supported by grants

from   the   Science   and   Technology   Project   Plan   of   Liao   Ning   Province
(2019JH2/10300027).

Discussion
   Several studies have demonstrated the benefit of intravenous alteplase to treat AIS
beyond 4.5 hours time window.5,6 However, the efficacy and safety of intravenous TNK

in  the  patients  with  the  extended  time  windows  are  not  fully  investigated.               Two
prospective, non-randomized studies with small sample                  supported the feasibility of
intravenous TNK for AIS within 12 to 24 hours after onset.7,8

   The current study is a phase 2, randomized, clinical trial to investigate the efficacy

and safety of intravenous TNK in AIS patients within 4.5-24 hours of onset, which is
quite different from two previous studies.7,8 First, the randomized control design was

adopted in this study, while non-randomized design was in two previous studies.

Second, the mismatch between DWI and FLAIR was set as neuroimaging criteria, while
non-contrast CT7      or perfusion computed tomography/magnetic resonance imaging8

were used in previous studies. Finally, the multi-center design was used in this trial,
while single center design was in a previous study.8

   In conclusion, the results of ROSE-TNK will provide us important information about

the effect of intravenous TNK in MRI-guided AIS patients within 4.5-24 hours.

                                                    9

                                            References
1       Powers  WJ,  Rabinstein  AA,  Ackerson  T,  et  al.  Guidelines  for  the  early
        management of patients with acute ischemic stroke: 2019 update to the 2018

        guidelines for the early management of acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for
        healthcare professionals from the American heart Association/American stroke
        association. Stroke 2019;50:e344–418.

2       Benedict, C.R., et al., New variant of human tissue plasminogen activator (TPA)
        with  enhanced  efficacy  and  lower  incidence  of  bleeding  compared  with

        recombinant human TPA. Circulation, 1995. 92(10): p. 3032-40.
3       3.     Logallo N, Novotny V, Assmus J, et al. Tenecteplase versus alteplase for
        management of acute ischaemic stroke (NOR-TEST): a phase 3, randomised,

        open-label, blinded endpoint trial. Lancet Neurol, 2017, 16(10): 781-788.
4       Coutts SB, Berge E, Campbell BC, Muir KW, Parsons MW. Tenecteplase for

        the treatment     of acute ischemic stroke: A review of completed and ongoing
        randomized controlled trials. Int J Stroke. 2018;13(9):885-892.
5       Ma H, Campbell BCV, Parsons MW, Churilov L, Levi CR, Hsu C, et al;

        EXTEND Investigators. Thrombolysis guided by perfusion imaging up to 9
        hours  after  onset  of  stroke.  N  Engl  J  Med.  2019;380:1795–1803.  doi:

        10.1056/NEJMoa1813046
6       Thomalla G, Simonsen CZ, Boutitie F, Andersen G, Berthezene Y, Cheng B, et
        al;  WAKE-UP  Investigators.  MRI-guided  thrombolysis  for  stroke  with

        unknown time of onset. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:611–622.
7       Coutts SB, Dubuc V, Mandzia J, et al. Tenecteplase-tissue-type plasminogen

        activator evaluation for minor ischemic stroke with proven occlusion. Stroke.
        2015;46(3):769-774.

8       Kate  M,  Wannamaker  R,  Kamble  H,  et  al.  Penumbral  Imaging-Based
        Thrombolysis with Tenecteplase Is Feasible up to 24 Hours after Symptom
        Onset. J Stroke. 2018;20(1):122-130.

9.      Kharitonova T, Mikulik R, Roine             RO, et al. Association of early National
        Institutes of Health Stroke Scale improvement with vessel recanalization and
                                                  10

         functional outcome after intravenous thrombolysis in ischemic stroke. Stroke

         2011;42(6):1638-43.
10.      Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, et al. Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours

         after acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 2008;359(13):1317-29.

                                                   11
