[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Discussion Guide for the Woods Article

By Grant A. Pignatiello, PhD, RN

Evidence-Based Review (EBR) is the journal club feature in the American Journal of Critical Care . In a journal club, attend ees review and critique published research articles: an important first step toward integrating evidence-based practice into patient care. General and specific questions such as those outlined in the 'Discussion Points' box aid journal club participants in probing the quality of the research study, the appropriateness of the study design and methods, the validity of the conclusions, and the implications of the article for clinical practice. When critically appraising this issue's EBR article, 'Fasting Versus a Heart-Healthy Diet Before Cardiac Catheterization: A Randomized Controlled Trial' (pp 29-33), consider the questions and discussion points outlined in the 'Discussion Points' box.

P atients scheduled for coronary artery catheterization are traditionally instructed to take nothing by mouth after midnight before their procedure, often enduring 6 hours or more without food or drink. This practice is associated with several adverse effects, including discomfort, irritability, dehydration, thirst, hunger, and a heightened risk of hypoglycemia. Remarkably, the existing guidelines for fasting before cardiac catheterization lack solid empirical backing, especially for low- to medium-risk patients. The purported risks associated with breaking this fast, such as gastric content regurgitation, aspiration pneumonia, and the need for emergency intubation, are exceedingly rare, with an incidence less than 0.4%. This low incidence is consistent with the consensus that differences in gastric complications are minimal between patients fasting for a mere 2 hours versus the traditional overnight fast. Furthermore, data regarding the potential risks and benefits of current fasting practices are scarce, beyond the perceived safety concerns or the need for adherence to evidencebased protocols. A few studies suggest that prolonged fasting may be unnecessary, with little benefit to patients. Given this limited evidence, this study aims to assess the necessity of having patients fast before undergoing elective procedures, as there is little research on the safety and risks associated with the current guidelines. Thus these researchers examined the management of patients undergoing conscious sedation for cardiac catheterization.

Investigator Spotlight

This feature briefly describes the personal journey and background story of the EBR article's lead investigators, discussing the circumstances that led them to undertake the line of inquiry represented in the research article featured in this issue.

C arri Woods, MBA, MSN, RN, shares that 'my nursing career began at the age of fifteen when my father lost his 3-year battle with cancer.' That experience 'stirred a desire to help others-a need to make a difference.' She earned her undergraduate degree in 2000 from Mount Carmel College of Nursing.

Carri Woods

As a nurse, she progressively worked her way into leadership, serving as charge nurse and nurse manager. These experiences inspired her to continue her educationearning an MSN and an MBA from Indiana Wesleyan University in 2017. She believes 'the time devoted to my graduate degrees helped me to see the value of evidence-based practice' and how bedside research enables clinicians

to move away from 'the way it's always been done' to 'how can we do this better?' Despite her 23 years of nursing experience, she retains her humility: 'I think it's beautiful how the way we see and think about the world can be tended to and cultivated. My personal philosophy is a work in progress [and] is ever changing as I continue along my career path.'

This prospective randomized controlled study was done within a progressive inpatient cardiac unit at a midwestern regional heart institute with 82 beds. The primary objective was to assess the safety of a heart-healthy diet with low acidic options compared with the standard nothing-by-mouth guidelines. A hearthealthy diet in this context referred to solid food that is low in fat, cholesterol, and sodium. Additionally, the researchers aimed to evaluate patients' comfort and satisfaction while ensuring their safety. The study included a convenience sample of 197 patients from the inpatient cardiac unit, aged 18 or older, who were scheduled for elective cardiac catheterization with conscious sedation and analgesia. Participating patients encompassed both sexes, various ethnic backgrounds, and age ranges. Patients with conditions affecting gastric emptying, such as chronic nausea or vomiting, were excluded, as were those requiring emergent cardiac catheterizations and those with specific medical conditions. Participants were randomly assigned to 2

©2024 American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, doi: https://doi.org/10.4037/ajcc2024895

34

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, January 2024, Volume 33, No. 1

www.ajcconline.org

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

protocol groups: a fasting group restricted to nothing by mouth after midnight, with sips of water and medication permitted, and a heart-healthy diet group who could consume a specified diet up until the procedure. Various parameters were measured, including symptoms before and after sedation, blood glucose levels, and gastrointestinal symptoms; satisfaction, pain, thirst, hunger, and fatigue were assessed using visual analog scales. Study results indicated that the heart-healthy diet group reported greater satisfaction with their preprocedural diet, along with reduced thirst and hunger compared with the fasting group. Importantly, no complications such as pneumonia, aspiration, intubation, or hypoglycemia were observed in either group during the postprocedural period. The authors conclude that patients allowed to eat a heart-healthy diet before cardiac catheterization are not at increased risk of postprocedural complications.

Information From the Authors

Having worked in cardiology for her entire career, Carri Woods, MBA, MSN, RN, the corresponding author for the article, has extensive experience caring for patients requiring cardiac catheterization. Most, if not all, of these patients were designated to receive nothing by mouth before their procedure. She found that 'many times, procedures are delayed, leading to patient dissatisfaction and frustration.' This frustration was shared by her unit's shared governance team. In fact, one of Mrs Woods's nursing colleagues read an article in AJCC about the need to change preoperative fasting guidelines, which served as 'the catalyst for the thought [that] we could conduct the [present] research.' After refining the idea, Mrs Woods approached the interventional cardiology team, where the idea was met with 'unanimous and incredibly positive' support. This interprofessional support was further buffered by Mrs Woods's organization's 'strong nursing research and evidence-based program that supports nurses through education and mentorship when a project is identified.'

Despite the strong support offered by the institution, the project encountered its own difficulties. For instance, Mrs Woods recalls 'COVID-19 was a significant and unexpected difficulty while conducting this research project,' because there weren't enough working staff to gather consent from patients and not enough patients available to provide consent because elective procedures were cancelled for a

About the Authors

Grant A. Pignatiello is an assistant professor, Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

lengthy period. Another hurdle was related to remaining compliant with the institutional review board (IRB) after the institution changed the standard diets, 'so we had to scramble to make [the project] work within the parameters approved.' Despite these challenges, Mrs Woods views the 'resiliency of the team to overcome the barriers and continue with the same due diligence as an unexpected success.'

As a novice researcher herself, Mrs Woods provides 3 pieces of advice for future researchers. First, 'it's important to be organized before you start and think about the things that could happen and have a plan.' In research, it is crucial to plan for contingencies, even if you may not be able to anticipate all of them. Second, 'know your IRB and understand how your own IRB works before you submit a research project so there aren't delays.' If you have questions about your IRB, contact them-a crucial component of their function is supporting researchers in developing an appropriate protocol. Third, novice investigators should plan their data collection procedures such that adequate staff are available to collect data. She concludes, 'There will be times it seems overwhelming and daunting, but the end is definitely worth it!'

Discussion Points

Description of the Study

R What clinical problem does this study address? R Why was this study needed?

Literature Evaluation

R What do existing publications state about the safety of maintaining patients on nothing-bymouth orders before cardiac catheterizations?

R How does this study contribute to the literature?

Sample

R What were the exclusion criteria? Why do you think these criteria were selected?

R Are the study findings generalizable to experiences at your institution? Why or why not?

Methods

R How were participants assigned to study conditions? What are the benefits of this method? R Are there any additional variables that you think the investigators should have accounted for?

Results

R Broadly, what were the findings from the study?

R What results, if any, did you find surprising?

Clinical Significance

R What are the implications of this research for clinical practice?

R How can the results of this research inform practice changes at your institution?

www.ajcconline.org

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, January 2024, Volume 33, No. 1

35

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

Copyright of American Journal of Critical Care is the property of American Association of Critical-Care Nurses and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
