deterministic_pdf_text_v1
extractor=pypdf 6.10.0
raw_pdf_sha256=e0e8b01b1dd19a88ccaa93a0c4b25da06e278d0e5426f5e2304e03c04a81bbc9
physical_page=3
normalization=remove word-character hyphen across whitespace, then map every Unicode whitespace run to one U+0020
text=and ful ﬁlled at least 2 systemic in ﬂammatory response syndrome criteria: (1) body temperature greater than 38.3/C14 C (100.9 /C14 F) or less than 36.0 /C14 C (96.8 /C14 F); (2) pulse rate greater than 90 beats/min; (3) respiratory rate greater than 20 breaths/min or PaCO 2 less than 32 mm Hg; and (4) WBC count greater than 12.0 /C2 109/L or less than 4.0/C2 109/L. Three of the 4 systemic in ﬂammatory response syndrome criteria (ie, temperature, respiratory rate, and pulse rate) were obtained as part of triage. In general, if any patient ful ﬁlled the temperature criterion and at least 1 other criterion with suspected infection, he or she would have had blood drawn for lactate. Some patients who did not ful ﬁll the abovementioned criteria may have been included according to the WBC count of the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome criteria. Exclusion criteria were known pregnancy, younger than 21 years, prisoners, do-not-attempt resuscitation status, known severe aortic insuf ﬁciency or severe anatomic abnormalities of the thoracic aorta, requirement for immediate surgery, previous aboveor below-knee amputation, inability to do passive leg raising (eg, ankylosis of hip joint, severe sciatica), and treating physician deemed aggressive care unsuitable. Additional exclusion criteria were individuals who received or were receiving b-agonist therapy (intravenous, oral, nebulized, or inhaled) within the last 4 hours, those who received 200 mL of crystalloids out-of-hospital, those unable to provide informed consent, and a primary diagnosis of trauma, burns, active seizures, acute cerebral vascular accident, acute coronary syndrome, status asthmaticus, major cardiac arrhythmias, active gastrointestinal hemorrhage, seizure, or drug overdose. All eligible patients were randomized 1:1 to the control or the intervention group. Blocked randomization, with randomly permutated block sizes of 4 and 6, was performed by investigators or research coordinators at the site through a Web randomization system at the Singapore Clinical Research Institute, which was not involved in patient enrollment and assessment. Before patient enrollment, a randomization list was generated with a validated SAS program (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC) and then uploaded to the randomization system. After hospital admission, all patients continued to have standard care in the ward or ICU. Clinicians in the ward and ICU were blinded to the patients’ enrollment in either group. Data were collected until hospital discharge or death, which-ever occurred earlier. Two to 3 research coordinators were available on weekdays from 8 AM to 10 PM and occasionally on weekends and night shifts. They screened patients for eligibility, assessed for inclusion and exclusion criteria, obtained informed consent from the patients or legally acceptable representatives, and randomized the patients into the study. They advised the managing team of physicians and nurses in setting up the noninvasive cardiac output monitor and performing the passive leg-raising maneuver according to the protocol. Patients were enrolled and randomized as soon as informed consent was obtained. The protocol was continued in the ED for up to 3 hours or until patients were transferred to the ward or ICU, whichever occurred sooner. Interventions The management entailed a systematic approach in a stepwise manner optimizing cardiac preload, afterload, and contractility, with the aim of improving cardiac pump function and oxygen delivery to the tissues. This included assessment of ﬂuid responsiveness with the noninvasive cardiac output monitor and passive leg-raising maneuver before administration of ﬂuid boluses ( Appendices E1 and E2, available online at www.annemergmed.com). The passive leg-raising maneuver was performed by ﬁrst placing a patient with noninvasive cardiac output monitoring in a semirecumbent position and obtaining hemodynamic parameters averaged during 3 minutes. Subsequently, both lower limbs were raised passively at least 45 degrees from the horizontal, with the torso supine. The hemodynamic parameters obtained in this position were also averaged during the next 3 minutes. Fluid responsiveness was de ﬁned as a stroke volume index increase of more than 10%. A stroke volume index increase of more than 20% mandated the administration of a 1,000-mL intravenous crystalloid bolus to the patient, whereas an increase greater than 10% but less than or equal to 20% triggered the administration of a 500-mL intravenous crystalloid bolus. A change in stroke volume index less than or equal to 10% and a mean arterial pressure (MAP) target of greater than or equal to 65 mm Hg and less than 90 mm Hg were used as hemodynamic goals. In patients for whom stroke volume index less than or equal to 10% was achieved, but not the MAP values, vasoactive agent treatment ( ﬁrst dopamine and then norepinephrine if required) was initiated to achieve the MAP targets. Assessment of ﬂuid responsiveness with passive leg-raising maneuver was performed 10 minutes after completion of each ﬂuid bolus and every 30 minutes for patients who were deemed not ﬂuid responsive initially. The control group was managed under usual care at the clinician ’s discretion in accordance with current best practice that involved the administration of intravenous ﬂuids, vasopressors, and inotropes according to the clinical judgment of the attending physicians managing the patient to attain a hemodynamic goal of MAP greater than or equal to 65 mm Hg. Patients in the control group did not undergo the passive leg-raising maneuver. Research Kuan et al Emergency Department Management of Sepsis Patients Volume 67, no. 3 : March 2016 Annals of Emergency Medicine 369
