[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Editorials

edented public health crisis, an accompanying economic crisis that has cost millions of Americans their jobs and health care coverage, and a crisis in racial justice that is shining a harsh light on disparities in health and health care. As the U.S. elections approach, incumbent and aspiring policymakers at all levels must grapple with the far-reaching implications of the design and reform of our health care system. Physicians and other health care providers have an opportunity to influence the policies that shape the system in which they work. We hope to offer a foundation for a common understanding of where we stand and where we need to go.

Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this editorial at NEJM.org.

From the Commonwealth Fund, New York (E.C.S.).

Schneider EC. Health care as an ongoing policy project. N Engl J Med 2020;383:405-8.

Reinhardt UE. Priced out: the economic and ethical costs of American health care. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe2023287 Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

Disarming the Respiratory Syncytial Virus

H. Cody Meissner, M.D.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) causes predictable, annual outbreaks of respiratory tract disease in temperate as well as tropical climates around the globe. Infants in the first 6 months of life are particularly vulnerable. 1 Natural infection does not result in sustained immunity, and reinfections are common.

RSV is a single-strand, negative-sense, enveloped virus containing an RNA genome that encodes for 11 viral proteins. Three structural proteins populate the viral surface envelope the attachment (G) protein, the fusion (F) protein, and a small hydrophobic protein. F and G proteins play critical roles in infectivity and pathogenesis. The G protein binds to receptors on ciliated epithelial cells of the respiratory tract, which allows the F protein to fuse the viral and cellular membranes and enable the viral genome to access the intracellular environment where viral replication occurs. After infection, more than 90% of neutralizing antibodies are directed against the F protein, which exists in both prefusion and postfusion conformations. 2 The epi­ topes on the F protein that are most sensitive to neutralization are hidden in the postfusion state, which poses challenges to the development of both a monoclonal antibody and a vaccine.

with either passive or active immunity. Palivizu­ mab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the F protein, has been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization for RSV among infants with recognized risk factors and was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1998 for this indication. 4 However, its modest efficacy, the requirement for monthly intramuscular administration, the emergence of viral strains with mutations in F protein (escape mutants), and the high cost limit its usefulness. Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to G protein are being studied for both prophylaxis and treatment for RSV infections. 5 Because a highly conserved domain in the G protein plays an important role in modifying the immune response in the host, it is hypothesized that a monoclonal antibody against this proinflammatory protein may reduce disease severity.

Although studies in healthy RSV-infected volunteers have shown that antiviral drugs may reduce the RSV viral load, a clinical trial with presatovir in compromised patients naturally infected with RSV did not show significant clinical benefit. 3 The lack of an effective treatment has placed emphasis on preventing disease Most of the approximately 100,000 young children in the United States who are hospitalized annually for RSV infection have no recognized risk factors and do not qualify for monthly prophylaxis. This partly explains why prophylaxis with palivizumab has a minimal effect on the overall burden of RSV infection in the United States and elsewhere. A more practical approach to prophylaxis would be the administration of a long-lasting monoclonal antibody to all infants born shortly before or during the RSV season. If a single intramuscular dose at birth could provide several months of protection, the burden of infection would be shifted to older children who are at lower risk for hospitalization.

In this issue of the Journal , Griffin et al. 6 re-

n engl j med 383;5 nejm.org July 30, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine

Downloaded from nejm.org at CARLETON UNIVERSITY on July 31, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

487

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

The new england journal o f medicine

port the results of a randomized trial of nirsevimab (a monoclonal antibody to F protein with an extended half-life) in preterm infants. Nirsevi­ mab is one of several antibodies with a prolonged half-life that is in development. Introduction of a triple M252Y/S254T/T256E (YTE) mutation on the Fc fragment of the IgG antibody reduces antibody degradation in the liposome, which prolongs the half-life and obviates the need for monthly administration. In this trial, 1447 infants born at 29 to 35 weeks of gestation near the onset of the RSV season were randomly assigned to receive intramuscular prophylaxis with nirsevimab or placebo. The incidence of medically attended, RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection was 70% lower with nirsevimab than with placebo (2.6% vs. 9.5%) through 150 days after administration, and the incidence of hospitalization for RSV was 78% lower (0.8% vs. 4.1%).

The development of a safe and effective RSV vaccine has been a goal for decades. However, negative experience with a formalin-inactivated RSV vaccine that was evaluated in young children in the 1960s (the vaccine had stimulated the production of nonneutralizing antibodies and a T-cell response that resulted in enhanced RSV disease in a subsequent season 7 ) led to ongoing concerns about potential untoward effects of a nonlive RSV vaccine. These concerns resonate today in efforts to develop a vaccine against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, another RNA respiratory virus. Ideally, a safe and effective RSV vaccine will induce a more sustained adaptive immune response than the response that occurs after natural RSV infection.

Also in this issue, Madhi et al. 8 report the results of a randomized trial of a nanoparticle, aluminum-adjuvanted, prefusion F protein vaccine administered in pregnant women with an expected delivery date near the start of the RSV season. In this trial, the women were randomly assigned to receive a single intramuscular dose of vaccine or placebo at 28 to 36 weeks of gestation, and the offspring were followed for a lower respiratory tract infection up to 180 days after birth. Maternal vaccination elicited antibody responses against prefusion and postfusion epitopes of the F protein. The geometric mean ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) units of anti-F IgG were more than 12 times as high in infants who were born to vaccinated mothers as in infants who were born to unvaccinated mothers, a finding that indicates effective transplacental transfer. The primary outcome - vaccine efficacy against RSV-associated, medically significant lower respiratory tract infection in infants up to 90 days of life - was 39.4% (97.5% confidence interval, -1.0 to 63.7), which did not meet the prespecified criterion for success. However, there was evidence of vaccine efficacy against the secondary end points of hospitalization for RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection and RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection with severe hypoxemia, findings that suggest a potential benefit of this strategy.

The results of the two current trials support the development of a monoclonal antibody with an extended half-life to deliver passive immunity, as well as provide a basis for further study of nanoparticle or alternative RSV vaccines to induce a protective and durable neutralizing antibody response. Both approaches offer hope that an effective means for preventing RSV infections may finally be in sight.

Disclosure forms provided by the author are available with the full text of this editorial at NEJM.org.

From Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston.

Kim L, Rha B, Abramson JS, et al. Identifying gaps in respiratory syncytial virus disease epidemiology in the United States prior to the introduction of vaccines. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65: 1020-5.

Openshaw PJM, Chiu C, Culley FJ, Johansson C. Protective and harmful immunity to RSV infection. Annu Rev Immunol 2017; 35: 501-32.

Marty FM, Chemaly RF, Mullane KM, et al. A phase 2b, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study evaluating antiviral effects, pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability of presatovir in hematopoietic cell transplant recipients with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection of the lower respiratory tract. Clin Infect Dis 2019 December 3 (Epub ahead of print).

Meissner HC. Viral bronchiolitis in children. N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 62-72.

Tripp RA, Power UF, Openshaw PJM, Kauvar LM. Respiratory syncytial virus: targeting the G protein provides a new approach for an old problem. J Virol 2018; 92(3): e01302-17.

Griffin MP, Yuan Y, Takas T, et al. Single-dose nirsevimab for prevention of RSV in preterm infants. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 415-25.

Kim HW, Canchola JG, Brandt CD, et al. Respiratory syncytial virus disease in infants despite prior administration of antigenic inactivated vaccine. Am J Epidemiol 1969; 89: 422-34.

Madhi SA, Polack FP, Piedra PA, et al. Respiratory syncytial virus vaccination during pregnancy and effects in infants. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 426-39.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe2021648 Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

488

n engl j med 383;5 nejm.org July 30, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine

Downloaded from nejm.org at CARLETON UNIVERSITY on July 31, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
