[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

ARTICLE IN PRESS

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS · www.jpeds.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

The Relationship between High Flow Nasal Cannula Flow Rate and Effort of Breathing in Children

Thomas Weiler, MD 1 , Asavari Kamerkar, DO 1,2 , Justin Hotz, RRT 1 , Patrick A. Ross, MD 1,2 , Christopher J. L. Newth, MD, FRCPC 1,2 , and Robinder G. Khemani, MD, MsCI 1,2

Objective To use an objective metric of effort of breathing to determine optimal high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) flow rates in children < 3 years of age.

Study design Single-center prospective trial in a 24-bed pediatric intensive care unit of children < 3 years of age on HFNC. We measured the percent change in pressure ∙ rate product (PRP) (an objective measure of effort of breathing) as a function of weight-indexed flow rates of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 L/kg/minute. For a subgroup of patients, 2 different HFNC delivery systems (Fisher & Paykel [Auckland, New Zealand] and Vapotherm [Exeter, New Hampshire]) were compared.

Results Twenty-one patients (49 titration episodes) were studied. The most common diagnoses were bronchiolitis and pneumonia. Overall, there was a significant difference in the percent change in PRP from baseline (of 0.5 L/kg/minute) with increasing flow rates for the entire cohort ( P < .001) with largest change at 2.0 L/kg/min ( -21%). Subgroup analyses showed no significant difference in percent change in PRP from baseline when comparing the 2 different HFNC delivery systems ( P = .12). Patients ≤ 8 kg experienced a larger percent change in PRP as HFNC flow rates were increased ( P = .001) than patients > 8 kg.

Conclusions The optimal HFNC flow rate to reduce effort of breathing in infants and young children is approximately 1.5-2.0 L/kg/minute with more benefit seen in children ≤ 8 kg. (J Pediatr 2017; ■■ : ■■ -■■ ).

See editorial, p ···

H igh flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen delivery is a commonly used method of noninvasive respiratory support for critically ill children. 1 Recent randomized controlled trial data highlight that HFNC may be superior to 'regular' nasal cannula in preventing treatment failure or the need for intensive care for children with moderate bronchiolitis. 2 Several retrospective studies have agreed with this finding on intensive care utilization and shown that HFNC is associated with lower rates of intubation and mechanical ventilation. 3-5

Emerging literature also demonstrates that HFNC can improve respiratory mechanics. In preterm infants, HFNC has been shown to reduce thoracoabdominal asynchrony, 6 improve gas exchange, 7 and lower effort of breathing. 6 In term infants, Pham et al 8 showed that there was a significant decrease in effort of breathing (as measured by pressure ∙ rate product [PRP]) in infants with bronchiolitis supported with 2 L/kg/minute of HFNC compared with those with no respiratory support, but they did not evaluate any intermediate levels of support. Previous studies have also described a dose-dependent relationship between increasing levels of HFNC and decreasing objective metrics of effort of breathing in neonatal 9 and pediatric 10 literature, but these prior studies have measured effort of breathing at absolute flow rates, not evaluating potentially significant differences in optimal flow rates for patients of varied ages (eg, between a 1-month-old and 3-year-old child).

Building on this previous work, we hypothesized that there is a relationship between HFNC flow rate and patient effort of breathing and that this relationship may be affected by the type of HFNC delivery system used and patient weight.

Methods

We performed a single-center prospective trial in the 24-bed multidisciplinary medical-surgical pediatric intensive care unit at Children's Hospital Los Angeles (CHLA)fromSeptember 2014 to June 2016.This study was approved by the CHLA

CHLA

Children's Hospital Los Angeles

FP

Fisher & Paykel

HFNC

High flow nasal cannula

IBW

Ideal body weight

PA

Phase angle

PRP

Pressure ∙ rate product

RIP

Respiratory inductance plethysmography

VT

Vapotherm

From the 1 Department of Anesthesiology Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital Los Angeles; and 2 Department of Pediatrics, University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA

Vapotherm, Inc. provided a limited number of high flow nasal cannula delivery systems for use in this study but this company did not have any role in (1) study design, (2) collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, (3) the writing of the report, or (4) the decision to submit the paper for publication. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

0022-3476/$ - see front matter. © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

http://dx.doi.org10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.06.006

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

1

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS · www.jpeds.com

Volume

institutional review board, and informed consent was obtained. All patients ≤ 3 years of age admitted to the CHLA pediatric intensive care unit and placed on HFNC by the clinical team were eligible. We excluded patients if they had a corrected gestational age less than 37 weeks or contraindications to either esophageal pressure probe placement (eg, nasopharyngeal or esophageal anomalies) or respiratory inductance plethysmography (RIP) bands (eg,abdominal wall defects such as omphalocele).

Measurements were performed using a pair of RIP bands (Nox Medical, Reykjavik, Iceland) and an esophageal pressure probe (CareFusion, Avea, SmartCath, Houten, The Netherlands). The RIP bands and esophageal pressure probe were connected to the BiCore II instrument (CareFusion),which provided interface between these sensors and a laptop computer. We recorded and analyzed data on a laptop computer using Polybench software (Applied Biosignals GmbH, Weener, Germany) and performedpostprocessing of the measurements usingVivosense software package (Vivonetics, San Diego, California).

Measurements were obtained at flow rates of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 L/kg/minute up to a maximum flow rate of 30 L/ minute on 2 different HFNC delivery systems: Fisher & Paykel (FP [Auckland, New Zealand]) and Vapotherm (VT [Exeter, New Hampshire]). The respiratory pattern was allowed to stabilize at each flow rate for an average of 2 minutes before measurement began. Flow levels were trialed in a random order, each for a 5-minute period. Measurements were collected during quiet tidal breathing and periods of artifact, such as crying or coughing, were removed from analysis using the postprocessing software (Vivosense). With one exception, patients were first studied on the FP HFNC delivery system and then (when available) transitioned to the VT HFNC delivery system. Patients were left on the VT HFNC delivery system for the remainder of their measurements until weaned off HFNC. Each subject had up to 2 daily measurements at each of the stated flow rates as long as they remained on HFNC (up to a maximum of 5 days).

Using esophageal manometry, we calculated the PRP: the product of the peak-to-trough change in esophageal pressure (cmH2O) and the respiratory rate (breaths per minute) ( Figure 1 ; available at www.jpeds.com). This has been previously validated as a metric of patient effort of breathing 11-14 where larger absolute values signify greater effort of breathing. From RIP, we calculated the phase angle (PA). PA is a measure of thoracoabdominal asynchrony and is a nonspecific surrogate metric for effort of breathing. 15

For each 5-minute titration episode, we calculated the median PRP and PA, which were used for analysis. After each set of measurements, we informed the clinical team of the flow rate that resulted in the lowest effort of breathing.

Statistical Analyses

The primary outcome was percent change in PRP from baseline, to account for within subject variability and repeated measurements per patient. Because we hypothesized that the effects of HFNC flow rates may be dependent on patient size, we further stratified our cohort into subgroups of ≤ 8 kg and > 8 kg.

■■

Secondary outcomes included absolute PRP value and PA. Baseline demographic characteristics of each patient were noted including patient diagnosis, age, race, sex, and weight.

Analysis was performed in Statistica v 12 (Statsoft, Tulsa, Oklahoma), and continuous data were presented as median with IQR given that they were not always normally distributed. Differences in the primary outcome of percent change in PRP from baseline were evaluated using Wilcoxon signedrank test. Secondary outcomes were analyzed using Friedman or Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA for non-normal distribution with multiple comparisons analysis based on a Bonferroni adjustment. Based on previous data from our group, 10 a difference in PRP of approximately 100 cmH2O*breaths/minute was considered clinically significant. Using this effect size, with an alpha of 0.05 and desired power of 0.8, our goal sample size was calculated at 20 patients.

Results

A total of 54 patients meeting inclusion criteria were approached, and 21 patients were consented and studied for a total of 49 titration episodes. Demographic and clinical characteristics were recorded ( Table ) and patients screened and studied are described in a CONSORT diagram ( Figure 2 ; available at www.jpeds.com). The most common reason consent was refused was related to placement of the esophageal catheter.

Analyzing all titration episodes on all types of HFNC delivery systems, the median absolute PRP decreased as weightindexed flow rates increased ( P < .001) ( Figure 3 ; available at www.jpeds.com). The median PA did not exhibit a change with increasing flow rates ( P = .91) ( Figure 4 ; available at www.jpeds.com). When analyzing the primary outcome of percent change in PRP from baseline, there was a dosedependent relationship between increasing flow rates and greater percent change in PRP from baseline with the largest reduction seen at 2.0 L/kg/minute ( P < .001) ( Figure 5 ). Flow rates between 1.5 and 2.0 L/kg/minute resulted in similar percent change in PRP from baseline ( -20% and -21%, respectively). Multiple comparisons analysis showed that flow

[DOCLING_TABLE rows=16 columns=2]
| Table. Patient demographics (n = 21): median (IQR or percent) | Table. Patient demographics (n = 21): median (IQR or percent) |
| Median age (mo) | 6 (2, 12) |
| Median weight (kg) | 6.5 (5, 9) |
| Median weight compared with IBW (kg) | - 0.5 ( - 1.7, 0.6) |
| Ethnicity/race: n (%) |  |
| African American | 2 (10) |
| Hispanic | 15 (71) |
| Not specified | 4 (19) |
| Respiratory illness: n (%) |  |
| Bronchiolitis | 13 (62) |
| Pneumonia | 3 (14) |
| Other | 5 (24) |
| Patients intubated: n (%) | 2 (10) |
| Median HFNC duration (d) | 2 (1-4) |
| Median PICU LOS (d) | 4 (2-6) |
| Median hospital LOS (d) | 7.5 (5.8-14.3) |
[/DOCLING_TABLE]

LOS , length of stay; PICU , pediatric intensive care unit.

2

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

Weiler et al

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

2017

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

■■

Figure 5. Percent change in PRP from baseline as a function of flow rate. The largest reduction in PRP happened at flow rates of 1.5 and 2.0 L/kg/minute ( -20% and -21%, respectively). Multiple comparisons analysis showed significant percent change in PRP when comparing against 0.5 (*) and 1.0 (†) L/kg/min.

rates of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 L/kg/minute resulted in lower PRP than at 0.5 L/kg/minute (all P < .03) and that flow rates of 2.0 L/kg/minute resulted in lower PRP than at 1.0 L/kg/ minute ( P = .005) ( Figure 5 ). For all titration episodes, the lowest PRP occurred at 2.0 L/kg/minute for 51% of all patients, at 1.5 L/kg/minute for 35%, at 1.0 L/kg/minute for 12%, and at 0.5 L/kg/minute for 2%.

Twelve patients had back-to-back titrations on FP and VT. When comparing the 2 HFNC delivery systems, there was no difference in the percent change in PRP from baseline as flow rates were increased ( P = .18). Of note, the maximum decrease in percent change in PRP from baseline occurred at 1.5 L/ kg/minute on VT and at 2.0 L/kg/minute on FP ( Figure 6 ).

To assess the relationship between patient size and doseresponse of HFNC flow rate, we compared subgroups stratified by weight (patients ≤ 8 kg and > 8 kg). For this analysis, we looked only at the first titration performed on the HFNC delivery systems. For patients ≤ 8 kg (12 patients, 20 episodes), there was a significant dose-dependent relationship between increasing flow rate and greater percent change in PRP from baseline ( P = .001) with a maximum reduction at flow rates of 1.5 L/kg/minute. Multiple comparisons analysis was similar to the entire group, showing that flow rates of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 L/ kg/minute resulted in lower PRP than at 0.5 L/kg/minute (all P values < .024) and flow rates of 2.0 resulted in lower PRP than at 1.0 L/kg/minute ( P = .017) ( Figure 7 ). Patients > 8 kg (9 patients, 12 episodes) had a trend toward reduction in PRP as flow rate increased but the treatment effect was smaller and not statistically significant ( P = .38) ( Figure 7 ). Exploratory analysis of patients by further stratified weight groupings ( < 5 kg, 5-8 kg, and > 8 kg) showed that the largest maximum decrease in PRP (for all titrations) from optimal HFNC flow rate occurred in the lightest weight group ( < 5 kg) and that there was a significant difference in percent change in PRP from baseline when comparing the three groups ( P = .028) ( Figure 8 ; available at www.jpeds.com).

Discussion

Using esophageal manometry to capture a direct metric of effort of breathing (PRP), we have demonstrated that increasing weight-indexed flow rates of HFNC (up to 2.0 L/kg/minute) decrease effort of breathing in a dose-dependent fashion with the largest effect seen in lighter children.

In the setting of respiratory illness, patients increase effort of breathing to maintain ventilation and oxygenation and compensate for changes in airway resistance and pulmonary compliance. Fundamentally, sustained periods of high effort of breathing lead to respiratory muscle fatigue. As such, therapeutic interventions such as HFNC aim to reduce effort of breathing with the hope of preventing progression to respiratory failure. Historically, assessment of effort of breathing has been based upon subjective clinical scoring systems that are subject to variations in inter-rater reliability and as a whole have not been validated for clinically meaningful use. 16 More objective measures of effort of breathing, such as PRP , can characterize the activity of respiratory muscles and are useful tools to evaluate the efficacy of therapies. 15 First used in pediatric patients by Klein et al, 17 PRP serves as an estimate of the energy cost of the work of breathing because oxygen consumption by muscle is proportional to the integral of muscle tension with respect to time. PRP is relatively easy to calculate and is robust against artifact, which is why we choose to use it over other objective measures of effort of breathing such as pressure ∙ time product. 18

The Relationship between High Flow Nasal Cannula Flow Rate and Effort of Breathing in Children

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

3

[DOCLING_PAGE 4]

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS · www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■

Figure 6. Percent change in PRP from baseline as a function of flow rate comparing HFNC delivery systems. Both systems resulted in a similar median reduction in PRP but the VT delivery system showed maximum reduction ( -23%) at 1.5 L/kg/ minute (IQR: -1 to -30%) while the FP delivery system showed maximum reduction ( -24%) at 2.0 L/kg/minute (IQR: -17 to -34%).

For our study, the percent change in PRP from baseline (of 0.5 L/kg/minute) was used rather than absolute PRP because there was a large degree of heterogeneity in the absolute PRP values in our study population based on patient size, disease severity, and time point of disease process, and we allowed for repeated measurements on the same patient (which would bias absolute PRP values in favor of those who were measured more frequently).

Interestingly, the other objective measure of effort of breathing we initially set out to analyze (PA as a measure of thoracoabdominal asynchrony) did not show a dose-dependent relationship with increasing HFNC flow rates ( Figure 4 ). Physiologically, one can infer from this finding that although respiratory disease in children requires larger negative intrathoracic pressure and/or respiratory rate to maintain adequate ventilation (reflected in the PRP), it does not cause increased thoracoabdominal asynchrony in a measurable way, even though this sign is traditionally used as a subjective assessment of increased effort of breathing.

Practitioners often select HFNC flow rates without overt consideration of a patient's weight or age. In fact, previous work from our institution showed that patients on flow rates of 8 L/ minute had significantly lower effort of breathing than those on 5 and 2 L/minute. 10 However, we believe that a flow rate of 8 L/minute for a 4 kg infant will likely have a different effect than 8 L/minute for a 10 kg child. For our analysis, we stratified our cohort into subgroups of ≤ 8 kg and > 8 kg. This cutoff is the 50th percentile weight for age for 6-month-old male children on Centers for Disease Control and Prevention growth charts 19 and was chosen as a breakpoint between early infancy and late infancy/early toddlerhood. This stratified analysis highlights the importance of titrating HFNC flow as a function of weight. We believe that our findings should prompt clinicians to consider increasing HFNC flow rates above levels they may normally use. Indeed, the results of a recent randomized controlled trial data highlight the superiority of HFNC compared with 'regular' nasal cannula in preventing treatment failure or the need for intensive care for children with moderate bronchiolitis despite only utilizing flow rates of 1 L/kg/minute. 2 Wehypothesize that these results might be even more dramatic with higher flow rates.

Similarly, the flow rates used by the clinical team at our center were generally lower than what would be considered 'optimal' based on our observations, and this did not differ by study day, even after sharing the information with the clinical team (analysis not shown). However, as respiratory disease improved, PRP generally decreased on subsequent days after day 1. As such, the clinical team may have chosen not to increase flow rates on subsequent study days because their patient was improving

4

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

Weiler et al

[DOCLING_PAGE 5]

2017

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

■■

Figure 7. Percent change in PRP from baseline as a function of flow rate stratified by patient weight. Patients weighing ≤ 8 kg showed greater maximum reduction in PRP ( -26%, P = .001) compared with those weighing > 8 kg ( -15%, P = .38). Multiple comparisons analysis in the patients weighing ≤ 8 kg showed significant percent change in PRP when comparing against 0.5 (*) and 1.0 (†) L/kg/minute.

and our institutional practice is gradual weaning of HFNC rather than abrupt transition or discontinuation.

Wedid not increase flow rates beyond 2 L/kg/minute because we hypothesized that increasing beyond this point would result in increased incidence of adverse effects of HFNC therapy (eg, air leak syndrome 20 or patient agitation) without additional benefit. Looking closely at our data, there was minimal improvement in PRP when increasing flow from 1.5 to 2.0 L/kg/ minute, inferring a plateau effect. Therefore, if a patient continues to have high effort of breathing on HFNC flow rates of 2 L/kg/minute, practitioners should consider alternative methods of respiratory support (such as invasive mechanical ventilation) as further increases in HFNC flow rate are unlikely to be beneficial. Recent data support this, showing that nasal continuous positive airway pressure may be a better method to reduce intubation rates compared with HFNC (at rates of 2 L/kg/minute) for children with bronchiolitis, 21 reinforcing the importance of quickly escalating support beyond HFNC if a patient's effort of breathing does not improve at optimal flow rates of 1.5 to 2.0 L/kg/minute.

Although others have shown that neonatal patients on the Vapotherm HFNC delivery system have improved respiratory rate, respiratory effort scores, and lower rates of reintubation than standard nasal cannula, 22 we did not find a significant difference in effort of breathing between the 2 different HFNC delivery systems evaluated. Even though each HFNC delivery system has unique design aspects (eg, nasal cannula interface, humidification, and flow properties), these did not appear to have clinically significant effects on effort of breathing in our study.

One of our most important findings was that HFNC has the largest effect on reducing effort of breathing in the smallest children. This implies that the benefit of HFNC is at least partially due to physiologic factors that change with patient age or size. The proposed mechanisms of action of HFNC include washout of dead space, reduction of inspiratory resistance, improving pulmonary mechanics, improving secretion mobilization, and generation of increased pharyngeal pressure. 23 Milési et al 24 found that HFNC > 2 L/kg/minute generated clinically significant increases in pharyngeal pressure, improved breathing patterns, and unloading of respiratory muscles in patients with bronchiolitis. Other groups argue that dead space washout is the primary mechanism given a plateau phenomenonobservedbeyond,which increasing flow rates did not correspond with continued increase in partial pressure of oxygen. 7

We also observed this plateau in physiological improvement (effort of breathing as measured by PRP) between 1.5 and 2.0 L/kg/minute of HFNC flow. We believe this plateau phenomenon supports dead space washout as a crucial mechanism leading to HFNC benefit and is the most likely explanation for our findings of HFNC's greater effect in smaller patients. This is because of previous work by Numa et al 25 that showed that anatomic dead space is higher in infancy ( > 3 mL/kg) than in children > 6 years old (0.8 mL/kg). Because of this, younger infants may have continued dead space washout at higher weight-indexed flow rates while older children reach a plateau of this benefit at an earlier point. However, our data cannot confirm or deny other physiological mechanisms in the effect of HFNC on reducing effort of breathing, such as some amount of continuous positive airway pressure being delivered.

The Relationship between High Flow Nasal Cannula Flow Rate and Effort of Breathing in Children

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

5

[DOCLING_PAGE 6]

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS · www.jpeds.com

Volume

There are a few limitations of our study worth consideration. First, this is a single-center trial with a relatively small sample size (although adequately powered).

For our analysis, we used measured body weight to calculate weight-indexed flow rates and not ideal body weight (IBW). Upon retrospective analysis, our patient population had a median weight slightly less than the IBW ( Table ) for this aged cohort. 17 It may be that IBW would be more suitable to use in obese patients, which were not prevalent in our patient population but could be of minor importance here.

Furthermore, obtaining effort of breathing measurements during quiet tidal breathing can be challenging in some infants and young children. Despite our best efforts to assure calm periods of breathing for accurate measurements while filtering artifact, the dynamic nature of effort of breathing can vary during observation periods. Moreover, we did not randomize the order of FP and VT for patients that had a head-tohead comparison. However, the physiologic effects of HFNC have rapid onset and resolution, making it unlikely that the previous HFNC delivery system has a long-lasting impact on effort of breathing.

Finally, it is possible that the presence of the esophageal pressure probe may have an impact upon the airway physiology. It could increase inspiratory and expiratory resistance, cause discomfort, decrease the total cross-sectional area of the nares, or increase nasopharyngeal pressure by limiting the space for gas efflux. This could have attenuated the efficacy of HFNC therapy and may affect the magnitude of the flow vs effort of breathing dose-dependence relationship.

There is a dose-dependent relationship between increasing HFNC flow rates and lower effort of breathing in children with the optimal HFNC flow rate between 1.5 and 2.0 L/ kg/min. This dose-dependent relationship is greatest for lower weight patients and does not appear to be dependent upon the type of HFNC delivery system. ■

Submitted for publication Feb 21, 2017; last revision received Apr 17, 2017; accepted Jun 2, 2017

Reprint requests: Thomas Weiler, MD, Pediatric Intensive Care, Presbyterian Hospital, 1100 Central Ave SE, 6th Floor, Albuquerque, NM 87106. E-mail: tweiler2@phs.org

References

Lee JH, Rehder KJ, Williford L, Cheifetz IM, Turner DA. Use of high flow nasal cannula in critically ill infants, children, and adults: a critical review of the literature. Intensive Care Med 2013;39:247-57.

Kepreotes E, Whitehead B, Attia J, Oldmeadow C, Collison A, Searles A, et al. High-flow warm humidified oxygen versus standard low-flow nasal cannula oxygen for moderate bronchiolitis (HFWHO RCT): an open, phase 4, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017;389:930-9.

McKiernan C, Chua LC, Visintainer PF, Allen H. High flow nasal cannulae therapy in infants with bronchiolitis. J Pediatr 2010;156:634-8.

■■

Schibler A, Pham TMT, Dunster KR, Foster K, Barlow A, Gibbons K, et al. Reduced intubation rates for infants after introduction of high-flow nasal prong oxygen delivery. Intensive Care Med 2011;37:847-52.

Wing R, James C, Maranda LS, Armsby CC. Use of high-flow nasal cannula support in the emergency department reduces the need for intubation in pediatric acute respiratory insufficiency. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012;28:1117-23.

Shetty S, Hickey A, Rafferty GF, Peacock JL, Greenough A. Work of breathing during CPAP and heated humidified high-flow nasal cannula. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2016;101:F404-7.

Frizzola M, Miller TL, Rodriguez ME, Zhu Y, Rojas J, Hesek A, et al. Highflow nasal cannula: impact on oxygenation and ventilation in an acute lung injury model. Pediatr Pulmonol 2011;46:67-74.

Pham TMT, O'Malley L, Mayfield S, Martin S, Schibler A. The effect of high flow nasal cannula therapy on the work of breathing in infants with bronchiolitis. Pediatr Pulmonol 2015;50:713-20.

Saslow JG, Aghai ZH, Nakhla TA, Hart JJ, Lawrysh R, Stahl GE, et al. Work of breathing using high-flow nasal cannula in preterm infants. J Perinatol 2006;26:476-80.

Rubin S, Ghuman A, Deakers T, Khemani R, Ross P, Newth CJ. Effort of breathing in children receiving high-flow nasal cannula. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014;15:1-6.

Ross PA, Hammer J, Khemani R, Klein M, Newth CJL. Pressure-rate product and phase angle as measures of acute inspiratory upper airway obstruction in rhesus monkeys. Pediatr Pulmonol 2010;45:63944.

Diblasi RM, Zignego JC, Tang DM, Hildebrandt J, Smith CV, Hansen TN, et al. Noninvasive respiratory support of juvenile rabbits by highamplitude bubble continuous positive airway pressure. Pediatr Res 2010;67:624-9.

Argent AC, Hatherill M, Newth CJL, Klein M. The effect of epinephrine by nebulization on measures of airway obstruction in patients with acute severe croup. Intensive Care Med 2007;34:138-47.

Argent AC, Newth CJL, Klein M. The mechanics of breathing in children with acute severe croup. Intensive Care Med 2007;34:324-32.

Hammer J, Eber E. Paediatric pulmonary function testing. Basel, NY: Karger; 2005.

Bekhof J, Reimink R, Brand PLP. Systematic review: insufficient validation of clinical scores for the assessment of acute dyspnoea in wheezing children. Paediatr Respir Rev 2013;15:98-112.

Klein M, Reynolds LG. Relief of sleep-related oropharyngeal airway obstruction by continuous insufflation of the pharynx. Lancet 1986;1:9359.

Collett PW, Perry C, Engel LA. Pressure-time product, flow, and oxygen cost of resistive breathing in humans. J Appl Physiol 1985;58:1263-72.

Birth to 36 months: Boys, Length-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles [Internet]. http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/data/set1clinical/ cj41l017.pdf. Accessed April 28, 2016.

Hegde S, Prodhan P. Serious air leak syndrome complicating high-flow nasal cannula therapy: a report of 3 cases. Pediatrics 2013;131:e93944.

Milési C, Essouri S, Pouyau R, Liet J-M, Afanetti M, Portefaix A, et al. High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) versus nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) for the initial respiratory management of acute viral bronchiolitis in young infants: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (TRAMONTANE study). Intensive Care Med 2017;43:209-16.

Woodhead DD, Lambert DK, Clark JM, Christensen RD. Comparing two methods of delivering high-flow gas therapy by nasal cannula following endotracheal extubation: a prospective, randomized, masked, crossover trial. J Perinatol 2006;26:481-5.

Dysart K, Miller TL, Wolfson MR, Shaffer TH. Research in high flow therapy: mechanisms of action. Respir Med 2009;103:1400-5.

Milési C, Baleine J, Matecki S, Durand S, Combes C, Novais ARB, et al. Is treatment with a high flow nasal cannula effective in acute viral bronchiolitis? A physiologic study. Intensive Care Med 2013;39:1088-94.

NumaAH,Newth CJ.Anatomic dead space in infants and children. J Appl Physiol 1996;80:1485-9.

6

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

Weiler et al

[DOCLING_PAGE 7]

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

2017

■■

Figure 1. Diagram of the derivation of PRP from esophageal manometry. D PES , peak-to-trough change in esophageal pressure; RR , respiratory rate.

Figure 2. CONSORT diagram showing patient enrollment and data collection process. BiPAP , bilevel positive airway pressure; IMV , invasive mechanical ventilation.

The Relationship between High Flow Nasal Cannula Flow Rate and Effort of Breathing in Children

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

6.e1

[DOCLING_PAGE 8]

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS · www.jpeds.com

Volume

■■

Figure 3. PRP as a function of flow rate. Absolute PRP showed significant reduction with increasing flow rates ( P < .001) with the largest reduction at flow rates of 1.5 and 2.0 L/kg/minute. Multiple comparisons analysis showed significant change in PRP when comparing against 0.5 (*) and 1.0 (†) L/kg/minute.

Figure 4. PA as a function of flow rate. PA showed no significant change with increasing flow rates ( P = .91).

6.e2

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

Weiler et al

[DOCLING_PAGE 9]

■■ 2017

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

Figure 8. Maximum percent change in PRP from baseline stratified by patient weight. There was a significant difference between the 3 weight groups when looking only at the maximum percent change in PRP for each titration ( P = .028).

The Relationship between High Flow Nasal Cannula Flow Rate and Effort of Breathing in Children

FLA 5.4.0 DTD ■ YMPD9260_proof ■ June 29, 2017

6.e3
