[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Editorial

A multipronged approach to tackle RSV-associated disease

On July 23, 2021, in response to data showing an increase in out-of-season respiratory infections among young children, Public Health England issued a warning in which it encouraged caregivers to look out for symptoms of severe respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection in at-risk children. Similar advisories were issued in other countries, encouraging broader testing for RSV among patients presenting with acute respiratory illness. On Sept 3, 2021, the UK National Health Service (NHS) published guidance to support planning for redeployment to respond to the anticipated earlier, higher activity of RSV and other respiratory infections in children, which could increase pressure on paediatric critical and inpatient care this season. Uncertainty about what lies ahead underlines the pressing need for strategies to address the substantial burden of RSV-related morbidity and mortality.

Annually, RSV causes an estimated 33·1 million acute lower respiratory tract infections worldwide, and 3·2 million hospitalisations in children under 5 years. RSV-associated bronchiolitis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality among young children in low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs). Although bronchiolitisrelated mortality is low in high-income countries, seasonal outbreaks can put huge pressure on paediatric intensive care units (PICUs), and annual admissions have been increasing over the past 2 decades. In this issue, Reinout Bem and colleagues discuss the possible causes of this increased burden on PICUs, highlighting the potential role of the widespread adoption of high-flow nasal cannula for oxygen delivery and its impact on the practice of PICU referral and admission. This increasing use of paediatric critical care resources is of particular concern as health systems prepare for the possibility of exceptional demand over the autumn and winter months.

With elevated inter-seasonal activity after a year of low levels of RSV transmission and infection in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic-and, as a result, a large population of immune-naive infants and toddlers who might be at higher risk of severe RSV-related illness-the peak and duration of RSV activity and the demand on PICUs over the next few months are hard to predict. The NHS guidance emphasises the need for national, regional, and local collaboration to provide adequate staffing for paediatric care, including the possible redeployment and training of nursing staff from other services.

Severe RSV infection in early life is associated with subsequent wheeze and asthma; however, it remains unclear whether a causal relationship exists between RSV and asthma, or whether the association reflects shared genetic risk for both conditions. In this issue, Tina Hartert and colleagues highlight steps that could be taken to better understand the association. Capitalising on the seasonality of RSV to improve causal estimation is one possibility, and the authors point to the near absence of RSV infection for more than a year during the COVID-19 pandemic as 'an intriguing natural experiment'.

Strategies to prevent disease in infancy include passive immunisation through maternal vaccination and neonatal administration of monoclonal antibodies (eg, the long-acting prophylactic nirsevimab). In countries with clear RSV seasonality, the benefits of a targeted seasonal approach to administration warrant further investigation. In this issue, Barney Graham and colleagues report phase 1 results on the safety and immunogenicity of DS-Cav1, a prefusion F subunit vaccine; the finding of sustained neutralising activity after a low dose raises the hope of a single-dose vaccine option for healthy pregnant women to confer protection for a full season. Target populations for immunisation also include older infants and young children (eg, those born prematurely or with cardiopulmonary disease or immunodeficiency), and high-risk adults (eg, those aged ≥65 years).

Understanding of the spatiotemporal transmission dynamics of RSV, mechanisms of infection, pathogenesis of disease, and immunological mechanisms of protection in different populations will be key to developing new strategies for treatment and prevention. Molecular genetic studies will help in the identification of escape variants as immunisation strategies are introduced. Other priorities for research include predicting future change in the dynamics and patterns of outbreaks (eg, in response to climate change) and establishing the optimum use of health-care resources in LMICs and in high-income countries during periods of low and high RSV activity.

Reducing the global burden of RSV-related illness is a public health priority. As health systems prepare for a period of high disease activity, concerted efforts are needed to develop a range of new strategies for infection control, disease prevention, and improved management of RSVassociated disease. ■ The Lancet Respiratory Medicine For the NHS guidance on RSV preparedness see https://www. england.nhs.uk/wp-content/ uploads/2021/09/BW772respiratory-syncytial-virus-2021preparedness.pdf For more on the burden of acute lower respiratory infections due to RSV in young children see Articles Lancet 2017; 390: 946-58

Jesper Klausen/Science Photo

Library

For more on viral bronchiolitis see https://www.thelancet.com/ clinical/diseases/viral-

bronchiolitis

For more on the burden of bronchiolitis on PICUs see Comment page 1094

For more on the association between RSV infection and asthma see Comment page 1092

For more on nirsevimab in preterm infants see N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 415-25

For more on RSV seasonality and prevention strategy

planning see Articles Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21: 1303-12

For the report of the phase 1 trial of DS-Cav1 see Articles page 1111

For more on the RSV vaccine landscape see Review Lancet Infect Dis 2018; 18: e295-311

For more on RSV infection in elderly and high-risk adults see N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1749-59

www.thelancet.com/respiratory Vol 9 October 2021

1077
