[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Expert Review of Medical Devices

ISSN: 1743-4440 (Print) 1745-2422 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ierd20

High flow nasal cannula in the emergency department: indications, safety and effectiveness

Justin Wang, Khai Pin Lee, Shu-Ling Chong, Mervin Loi & Jan Hau Lee

To cite this article: Justin Wang, Khai Pin Lee, Shu-Ling Chong, Mervin Loi & Jan Hau Lee (2018): High flow nasal cannula in the emergency department: indications, safety and effectiveness, Expert Review of Medical Devices, DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2018.1548276

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17434440.2018.1548276

Accepted author version posted online: 14 Nov 2018.

Published online: 19 Nov 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 8

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ierd20

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

EXPERT REVIEW OF MEDICAL DEVICES

https://doi.org/10.1080/17434440.2018.1548276

REVIEW

High flow nasal cannula in the emergency department: indications, safety and effectiveness

Justin Wang a , Khai Pin Lee b , Shu-Ling Chong b , Mervin Loi c and Jan Hau Lee c

a Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK; b Children ' s Emergency, KK Women ' s and Children ' s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore; c Children ' s Intensive Care Unit, KK Women ' s and Children ' s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore

ABSTRACT

Introduction : Heated humidified high flow nasal cannula therapy (HHHFNCT) is emerging as a popular non-invasive mode of respiratory support in adults and children. In recent years, its use has extended beyond the intensive care unit to other clinical areas. This review aims to explore the mechanism of action, indications, safety, and effectiveness of HHHFNCT use in the Emergency Department (ED).

Areas covered : The mechanism of action of HHHFNCT, as well as its use in adult and pediatric ED will be discussed in this review.

Expert commentary : While there exists increasing enthusiasm in the use of HHHFNCT in the ED, constant monitoring of the patients and an experienced assessment of their response to treatment are critical and may require additional manpower deployment, which may be challenging, in the busy ED environment. Our experience with the use of HHHFNCT in children is still growing. Continual research in this area remains crucial in helping us better understand the patient types and conditions managed in ED that would most benefit from this device.

1. Introduction

Heated humidified high flow nasal cannula therapy (HHHFNCT) has surfaced as an important means of delivering humidified oxygen and offers an alternative non-invasive mode of ventilatory support for adults and children in respiratory distress [1]. The physiological benefits include the reduction in rebreathing as the nasopharyngeal dead space is constantly being replaced with fresh oxygen at high flow rates, and the increase in the amount of oxygen delivered given a reduction in entrained room air [2]. In contrast, conventional non-invasive ventilation (NIV) increases dead space due to the interfaces used [3]. Although high end-expiratory pressure cannot be generated since the circuit is open, some degree of positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) is created [4] which is important in preventing atelectasis. In normal spontaneous breathing, the upper airway has the ability to humidify and warm air even if the air is dry and cold [5]. However, supplemental oxygen is not warm and humidified at low flow, and in a long run would result in nose and mouth dryness. In essence, due to warm moist gas being delivered, HHHFNCT is better tolerated, and for the same reason, mucociliary function is maintained and improves mucosal toileting in the setting of inflammatory response from different causes. Clinical applications for HHHFNCT among adults include hypoxemic respiratory failure, cardiogenic pulmonary edema, post-operative, post-extubation, and palliative respiratory support [6]. HHHFNCT has also been reported to reduce the effort of breathing among children with bronchiolitis, pneumonia, asthma, and obstructive sleep apnea [7 -10]. Previously, the

ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 29 May 2018

Accepted 12 November 2018

KEYWORDS

Heated humidified high flow nasal cannula therapy; emergency department; bronchiolitis; asthma; pneumonia; positive end expiratory pressure

use of HHHFNCT was confined to the adult, neonatal and pediatric intensive care and high dependency units [11 -14]. However, in recent years, there has been a growing trend in its utilization in the emergency department (ED). Although there has been a number of randomized control trials (RCT) of the use of HHHFNCT in adults in the ED [15 -17], there remains a limited number of such trials conducted in the pediatric emergency medicine setting [18]. A review on the indications, safety, and effectiveness of HHHFNCT within the ED setting is timely. Where pertinent, we included some important animal studies to describe in greater detail the mechanisms of action of HHHFNCT in the support of patients with respiratory distress.

2. Methods

We performed a Medline search using the following keywords and/or MESH terms: high flow nasal cannula, oxygen inhalation therapy, positive pressure respiration, nasal cannula, nasal prong, and emergency service. We also hand searched relevant publications from articles obtained from the above search strategy. In this clinical review, we excluded nonEnglish publications and abstracts.

3. Mechanisms of action of HHHFNCT

HHHFNCT aims to deliver an air and oxygen admixture at a flow rate that exceeds the patient ' s inspiratory flow requirements [19]. There are several putative mechanisms of action for HHHFNCT.

CONTACT Justin Wang qwang@nhs.net Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP, United Kingdom

© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

2

J. WANG ET AL.

3.1. Nasopharyngeal dead space ' wash-out '

One of the suggested mechanisms of action for HHHFNCT is that it provides gas at a flow rate that replaces the nasopharyngeal space with fresh gas, thereby reducing the effects of rebreathing [2]. A study using a silicone resin model of the human nasal cavity showed that HHHFNCT flushes out the dead space in the nasal cavity, with turbulent mixing contributing to carbon dioxide clearance [20].

Additional supporting evidence was provided by an animal study using neonatal piglets with lung injury [21]. Comparison was made between Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) and HHHFNCT, with further subdivision of the HHHFNCT cohort into either high or low leak as determined by the type of nasal prong provided. Analysis of the results in the HHHFNCT subgroup showed that increasing HHHFNCT flow, under both leak conditions, resulted in improved partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) and oxygen (PaO2) in a manner which was independent of tracheal pressure alone. This improvement in gas exchange with increasing HHHFNCT flow continued up till a certain point, beyond which subsequent increments in flow rates no longer had any impact -the so-called ' saturation point ' . Furthermore, the piglets receiving HHHFNCT via the prongs with high leak had lower PaCO2 at flow rates <6 L/min than both the low leak or CPAP groups, suggesting that nasopharyngeal washout was a significant factor in gas exchange. In contrast, there was no incremental change in PaCO2 and PaO2 with increasing CPAP pressure [21]. Other studies using tracheal gas insufflation have also shown that gas exchange plateaus with increasing gas flow, when presumably washout of the dead space is maximal [22]. Collectively, these findings support the theory that washout of the nasopharyngeal dead space at least partly explains the effects seen with HHHFNCT. Extrathoracic dead space per kilogram of body weight decreases exponentially with increasing age in young children, and is up to three times greater in young infants compared to adults [23]. This suggests that the effect of dead space wash out is likely to be even greater in younger children.

3.2. Increased capacity for oxygen delivery

The fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) delivered by conventional low-flow devices is inaccurate and often much less than predicted [24,25], with the notable exception of Venturi masks [26]. Additionally, the minute ventilation in healthy adults has been shown to range from 30 L/min when performing light work, up to 70 L/min when performing heavy work [27]. Since conventional means of delivering supplementary oxygen are generally accepted to be limited to 15L/min, the maximum inspiratory flow rate of patients in acute respiratory distress is likely to outstrip delivery. This results in entrainment of room air, thereby effectively diluting the FiO2 that reaches the patient. HHHFNCT circumvents this by aiming to provide gas flow at a rate closer to maximum inspiratory flow rate, and has been shown in hypopharyngeal oxygraphy studies to deliver more accurate levels of FiO2 compared to low flow oxygen devices [28].

3.3. Generation of PEEP

Providing PEEP is fundamental to NIV techniques. It has been postulated that PEEP might also play a role in HHHFNCT therapy. Studies have shown that HHHFNCT can be used to generate PEEP of up to 12cmH2O in adults receiving gas flow of 100L/min [29]. PEEP generated is significantly higher in subjects who have their mouths closed than those who have their mouths open [30]. A prospective study was conducted in 15 adult patients post-cardiac surgery to compare the nasopharyngeal airway pressures generated by HHHFNCT and standard facemask therapy at 35 L/min of gas flow. This study showed that HHHFNCT generated a mean nasopharyngeal airway pressure of 2.7 [standard deviation (SD) 1.1] cmH2O when patients had their mouths closed, and 1.2 (SD 0.8) cmH2O with their mouths open [31]. The patients who received standard facemask therapy had negligible increase in nasopharyngeal airway pressure [31]. Other factors that may impact PEEP delivered by HHHFNCT include body mass index [32], gender [30], nasal prong fit [21] and leak around the nares [29].

Compared to the adult population, there are limited data for the amount of PEEP delivered by HHHFNCT in children. In a study of infants under 6 months old with acute Respiratory Syncytial Virus-positive bronchiolitis, pharyngeal pressure with HHHFNCT at flow rates of 2L/kg/min averaged approximately 4cmH2O, with good correlation between pharyngeal pressure and flow rate [33]. Generated PEEP can, however, be unpredictable in neonates receiving HHHFNCT, with one study showing that clinically significant CPAP could only be achieved in patients ≤ 1500 grams in weight and who had their mouths fully closed [34]. There is also likely to be substantial interand intra-individual variability in PEEP generated [35].

The measurement of end-expiratory lung impedance using electrical impedance tomography has been shown to reliably quantify lung volume changes [36]. This technique has demonstrated increased end expiratory lung volume in subjects receiving HHHFNCT [30], with a direct correlation to airway pressure generated [32]. This may reduce atelectasis and aid lung recruitment, thereby improving ventilation-perfusion matching and alveolar ventilation [19,37].

3.4. Effect on respiratory mechanics

Providing adequate heated humidified high-flow oxygen has been shown in various studies to reduce inspiratory resistance and work of breathing. First, by providing gas flows that are the same or exceeds the patient ' s peak inspiratory pressure, nasopharyngeal collapse that normally occurs during spontaneous respiration is counteracted, thereby decreasing upper airway resistance [2,38]. Second, warm and moist gas has been shown to improve mucociliary function which would maintain mucus clearance and prevent airway resistance and atelectasis [39]. Cold and dry gas can result in bronchoconstriction [40]. In vitro studies have also shown that exposure to low humidity conditions can exacerbate the inflammatory response of airway epithelial cells in humans [39]. HHHFNCT has also been noted to change the respiratory pattern of breathing. A study involving 38 adults showed an association of commencing HHHFNCT with reduction in respiratory rate, even though there was no statistically significant decrease in PaCO2 [41]. The investigators also found diminished thoracoabdominal asynchrony and dyspnea score as early as 15 minutes after initiating HHHFNCT, resulting in improved ventilation [41].

[DOCLING_PAGE 4]

EXPERT REVIEW OF MEDICAL DEVICES

3

3.5. Improved tolerability

A number of studies have demonstrated better comfort and less mouth dryness with the use of HHHFNCT compared to standard oxygen therapy delivered by masks, most likely attributed to the warm and moist air generated. A visual analog scale was utilized to evaluate mouth dryness in a blinded study involving 20 patients, which expectedly showed a significant reduction of this when HHHFNCT was used [42]. In children with respiratory distress from various etiologies, a study using the COMFORT scale revealed an improvement in patient comfort when oxygen was delivered using the HHHFNCT system as opposed to via nasal cannula or face mask [43]. To a certain degree, the ability to be able to eat and speak easily may have contributed to this comfort perception. A neonatal study has shown that parents preferred HHHFNCT compared to CPAP as it was easier to interact with them and take part in their cares, although there was no significant difference in patient comfort as per the EDIN (neonatal pain and comfort) score [44]. A survey among clinical staff demonstrated that they found HHHFNCT to be easier to administer and believe that it was more comfortable for infants [45]. Nevertheless, there have also been a few reports of discomfort when using HHHFNCT (e.g. feeling hot, noisy, injury to the nasal mucosa, and displacement of the nasal cannula) [46].

4. HHHFNCT in the adult emergency department

Among adults with acute respiratory failure, the use of HHHFNCT was reported to be associated with better oxygenation, lower respiratory rate, and better tolerability when compared to NIV [42,47,48]. HHHFNCT may also be effective in reducing dyspnea in cardiogenic pulmonary edema [49].

HHHFNCT use in clinical practice has extended beyond the intensive care setting to the ED. In a prospective observation study, Lenglet et al. studied 17 patients with acute respiratory failure presenting to the ED, 9 of whom had pneumonia and 4 had cardiogenic pulmonary edema [50]. HHHFNCT was instituted at a median flow of 40L/min. Dyspnea scores improved as early as 15 min post HHHFNCT, oxygenation improved and respiratory rates decreased. This beneficial effect persisted through 60 minutes postHHHFNCT. Importantly, 82% of caregivers report that the patient was more comfortable with HHHFNCT, and 76% of healthcare staff preferred HHHFNCT over conventional oxygen therapy [50]. In a retrospective chart review of 81 patients in the ED, in whom the most common cause of respiratory failure was acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arterial blood gas taken 2.4 ± 1.5 h after starting HHHFNCT revealed a significant reduction in PaCO2 levels from 54.7 ± 26.4 mmHg to 51.3 ± 25.8 mmHg among all patients ( p = 0.02) [51]. In a RCT in the ED of 40 patients, HHHFNCT significantly improved dyspnea and patient comfort when compared to conventional oxygen therapy, with no serious adverse events [52]. The HOT-ER study was an RCT of 303 adults presenting to the ED with hypoxia and tachypnea [16]. Patients were randomized to either HHHFNCT or to standard oxygen therapy. They found no statistically significant difference in conversion to mechanical ventilation in the ED between both groups [3.6% (95% CI 1.5 -7.9%) in the HHHFNCT group versus 7.2% (95% CI 3.8 -13%) in the standard oxygen therapy group ( p = 0.16)], and no difference in the length of stay in the ED (or in the hospital), or 90-day mortality. The authors did, however, highlighted the main limitation being the failure to reach the required sample size. Moreover, hypoxic patients that were not selected for the trial and the low rate of escalation to NIV could have biased the results to null [16]. In view of the limited ED trials, we describe the findings of a multicenter, open-label trial in intensive care units (ICUs) among 310 adults with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure [47]. The findings of this study may inform the impact of HHHFNCT on patients presenting with acute respiratory distress in the ED setting. Similar to the HOT-ER study [16], treatment with high-flow oxygen, standard oxygen therapy or NIV did not reveal any significant difference in intubation rates. However, there was a significant difference in 90-day mortality in favor of HHHFNCT compared with standard oxygen therapy (hazard ratio 2.01, 95% CI 1.01 -3.99). Although the choice of noninvasive respiratory support depends on the severity of hypoxemia, the role of NIV and HHHFNCT in this situation is still far from clear [53].

In summary, HHHFNCT appears to reduce dyspnea and tachypnea in patients with a wide range of respiratory diseases and is safe for use among adult patients in the ED. Whether the institution of HHHFNCT results in a lower rate of mechanical ventilation and long-term improved outcomes remains to be seen. Concerns have been expressed at extrapolating results of the current HHHFNCT studies to a largely variable ED patient population [54]. Delays in recognizing patient deterioration must be avoided. In the absence of a significant decrease in respiratory rate, poor oxygenation or persistent thoracoabdominal asynchrony after HHHFNCT initiation, clinicians must suspect possible HHHFNCT failure [41] and consider escalating respiratory support to NIV or tracheal intubation. Therefore, it is vital that the latter must be readily available and continuous monitoring provided [55].

5. HHHFNCT in the pediatric emergency department

HHHFNCT use has been reported in a number of respiratory conditions seen in the pediatric ED, most commonly bronchiolitis [56]. A retrospective study of 848 patients with any acute respiratory insufficiency severe enough to require ICU admission, including asthma, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and croup, showed 83% reduction in the odds of intubation in the pediatric ED with the implementation of an institution-wide guideline on pediatric HHHFNCT use compared with patients admitted before the availability of HHHFNCT (odds ratio, 0.17; 95% CI 0.06 -0.50; p = 0.001) [57]. Importantly, there was no change in mortality or median ICU length of stay with this implementation. However, the respiratory support used prior to HHHFNCT introduction was not clearly stated, making it difficult to draw definite conclusions from the study. Infants with moderate to severe bronchiolitis started on HHHFNCT in ED have shown a greater improvement in respiratory effort and ability to feed, when compared with standard oxygen therapy [58]. An early pilot ED study in 61 infants aged <12 months with bronchiolitis demonstrated that those managed with HHHFNCT were four times less likely to require ICU admission compared to the standard oxygen therapy group (OR 4.086, 95% CI 1.0 -8.2; p = 0.043) [59]. In a recent multicenter RCT involving 1472 infants with bronchiolitis who presented to the emergency department and general pediatric wards, 12% of those who received HHHFNCT early required escalation of care compared to 23% of those who received standard oxygen therapy (risk difference, -11% points; 95% CI, -15 to -7; p < 0.001). In the latter group, 61% responded to HHHFNCT rescue therapy. There were no significant differences in the duration of oxygen treatment or overall hospital stay. The authors concluded that early institution of HHHFNCT in patients with bronchiolitis is beneficial [18].

[DOCLING_PAGE 5]

4

J. WANG ET AL.

Aside from bronchiolitis, NIV options have also been compared in children with pneumonia. Due to the limited ED literature on the use of HHHFNCT in children with pneumonia, we described the results of an open randomized controlled trial in the ICU comparing bubble CPAP, HHHFNCT, and standard oxygen therapy among 225 children in Bangladesh with severe pneumonia. Results showed that while the bubble CPAP group had significantly fewer treatment failures (clinical failure, intubation, deaths) than the standard oxygen therapy group [relative risk (RR) 0.27, 99.7% CI 0.07 -0.99; p = 0.003], there were no significant difference in treatment failures between the bubble CPAP and HHHFNCT groups (RR 0.50, 99.7% 0.11 -2.29; p = 0.175) [60].

Responders to HHHFNCT should demonstrate a decreased respiratory rate, lesser use of accessory muscles, reduced FiO2 requirements, and improved radiological findings [61]. Earlier studies showed the need to escalate from HHHFNCT to higher levels of ventilatory support ranged between 13% and 39% [56,60]. In a retrospective cohort study of HHHFNCT use among children younger than 2 years old, the majority of those with bronchiolitis, pneumonia or asthma who failed HHHFNCT therapy had triage respiratory rate > 90th centile, initial venous pCO2 > 50mmHg and an initial pH < 7.30. However, a diagnosis of bronchiolitis was shown to be protective against the subsequent need for intubation [62].

In a recent prospective pilot study involving 62 children with moderate to severe exacerbation of asthma presenting to ED, those who received HHHFNCT had a significant reduction in respiratory distress within the first two hours of treatment as measured by the pulmonary score, compared to those who received standard oxygen therapy ( p = 0.01). Importantly, no complications were noted. However, there were no differences in length of stay and requirement for further therapies [63].

In summary, early ED studies among children on HHHFNCT showed an improvement in symptoms and potential in reducing mechanical ventilation and ICU admissions, particularly among infants with bronchiolitis which was affirmed in the recent RCT [18].

6. Conclusion

HHHFNCT appears to be an increasingly useful tool in the ED physician ' s armamentarium when faced with a patient in respiratory distress. While promising, prudent patient selection remains key. Future research should focus on specific respiratory pathologies in both adults and children. In the situation of lack of trials on the relevant patient population, care should be taken when extrapolating HHHFNCT use in the ED.

7. Expert commentary

HHHFNCT has emerged as a popular mode of non-invasive respiratory support in recent years. It has been found to be more tolerable and comfortable for patients to converse and express themselves (Level of Evidence 2b). Due to the heated and humidified nature of the gas provided, mouth dryness is reduced, and bronchoconstriction from cold gas is minimized (Level of Evidence 3b). Apart from that, the contact of the nasal cannula is mainly within the nostrils and the cheeks, hence reducing the risk of skin lesions in the other parts of the face as compared to the interfaces used with other current modes of NIV. HHHFNCT setup and application seems to be more straightforward and requires minimal technical skills. Moreover, training can be provided within a short period of time for those who are less familiar with it (Level of Evidence3b).

However, one of the drawbacks of using HHHFNCT is the certain degree of experience that is needed to decide which acutely ill adult or child would benefit from this form of noninvasive respiratory support over other modes. This is particularly important to minimize the delay in utilizing the best tool to support a patient with respiratory distress. Like with any mode of treatment, having made the decision to administer HHHFNCT, it is crucial to assess the patient ' s response to the intervention. Constant monitoring is required to prompt the clinician to escalate therapy if necessary. Given the nature of ED and its high turnover of patients, this may prove to be the most challenging obstacle to the use of HHHFNCT, where the staff to patient ratio is low. Adequately trained health professionals within this clinical setting has to be available before HHHFNCT can be used routinely in the ED setting. Studies have suggested that HHHFNCT failure may happen within 7 -14 hours, compared to two hours in those using other modes of NIV, in children less than 2 years old, highlighting the need for continual monitoring beyond the ED [37]. Similarly, in adults, there have been concerns raised about the potential delay in escalation of treatment when on HHHFNCT, leading to worsening clinical outcome [64] (Level of Evidence 2b).

Although HHHFNCT has been used extensively for many years in the neonatal population, its use in infants and older children is still somewhat limited. Current indications are unclear, but is thought to be similar to other modes of NIV [62]. There are reports of success in bronchiolitis, pneumonia, asthma, recurrent apneas, neuromuscular diseases, and heart failure. Overall, the evidence is either conflicting or lacking, particularly in the context of initializing HHHFNCT in ED. Until then, extrapolation of data from pediatric intensive care studies may be necessary. From recent studies in bronchiolitis (Level of Evidence 1b) and asthma (Level of Evidence 3b), early use of HHHFNCT seems to be beneficial compared to standard oxygen therapy [18,63]. The next steps may be to compare early use of HHHFNCT with that of CPAP in ED. In the meantime, a multicenter RCT feasibility trial named FIRST ABC is being conducted to compare the use of HHHFNCT and CPAP as first-line non-invasive mode of ventilatory support within the PICU setting [65]. The use of HHHFNCT in other conditions also needs to be addressed to determine which groups of patients would benefit most from it.

[DOCLING_PAGE 6]

EXPERT REVIEW OF MEDICAL DEVICES

5

Despite the existence of multiple local guidelines, the evidence on recommended starting flow rate, when and how to wean, remains unclear. Part of the reason is the difficulty and impracticality of measuring the amount of positive pressure generated within the airway. It would be ideal to be able to detect these pressures using a sensor integrated within the HHHFNCT circuit. With this knowledge, flow rates can be adjusted accordingly to maximize its use and minimize complications. Although this may be difficult to achieve due to the nature of an open circuit with mouth opening, perhaps integration and averages of transient readings obtained may be feasible.

Similarly, adult studies on HHHFNCT have mainly involved small number of patients. These studies have demonstrated that HHHFNCT can be utilized in a wide range of respiratory illnesses and reduces patients ' work of breathing. However, its clinical efficacy remains uncertain, with no significant difference in escalation to mechanical ventilation, length of stay in ED or rate of mortality, when compared to conventional treatment. It is important to bear in mind that the population in ED is heterogeneous resulting in a dilution of true effect in specific respiratory conditions.

Given the scarcity of evidence available, HHHFNCT should be used with caution in infants and children, particularly outside the PICU setting, and also in adults. As with all treatment, a critical approach has to be taken once HHHFNCT is initiated, to look for improvement in clinical signs and symptoms, and monitoring for potential deterioration that requires escalation of intervention.

In terms of cost-effectiveness of HHHFNCT compared to standard oxygen therapy or NIV, computer-based models from the United Kingdom have demonstrated that when HHHFNCT is used as first-line treatment, HHHFNCT is estimated to save £469 (USD $608) per patient compared to standard oxygen therapy and £611 (USD$793) per patient compared to NIV [66]. In another study carried out in Finland comparing HHHFNCT and standard oxygen therapy in infants with bronchiolitis, investigators found that the treatment cost of each episode was between € 1,312 -2,644 (USD $1,786 -3,600) in the HHHFNCT group compared to € 1,598 -3,764 (USD$2,175 -5,125) in the standard oxygen therapy group. They also found that the intensive care unit admission rates were lower for the HHHFNCT group than for the standard oxygen therapy group [67].

8. Five-year view

Based on the ease of administration, coupled to the potential benefits including patient satisfaction, we expect that the use of HHHFNCT will increase in the future overall despite the lack of full understanding of the mechanism of action and pressures provided. We foresee that there would be an increasing number of ED health professionals and institutions that will be comfortable initiating HHHFNCT therapy early on in the disease process as more training is provided in this field. There will probably be more studies tailored towards specific conditions, and comparison between HHHFNCT and standard oxygen therapy or HHHFNCT versus CPAP, as we have noted in the past few years. Similarly, evidence on starting flow rates would become more available, particularly whether using higher flow rates than currently recommended for a given duration would be advantageous, bearing in mind the potential complications that may be associated with this. From the device point of view, a form of non-invasive pressure sensor within the circuit interface would represent a medical advancement as this can provide more information for the clinicians, especially during the weaning phase.

Key issues

The mechanism of action of HHHFNCT includes nasopharyngeal dead space ' wash-out ' , increase in the capacity for oxygen delivery, the generation of positive end expiratory pressure and improvement in respiratory mechanics.

HHHFNCT is more tolerable for patients and easier for clinical staff to administer compared to other methods of non-invasive respiratory support.

Use of HHHFNCT has extended beyond intensive care practice to ED, and found to be safe, with the ability to reduce work of breathing of patients in acute respiratory and cardiac illnesses. It is also better tolerated.

Studies in pediatric HHHFNCT use in the ED setting is limited, but early use showed clinical improvement in those with bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and asthma.

Funding

This paper was not funded

Declaration of interest

The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

Reviewer disclosures

Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.

[DOCLING_PAGE 7]

6

J. WANG ET AL.

References

Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest ( · ) or of considerable interest ( ·· ) to readers.

Fedor KL. Noninvasive respiratory support in infants and children. Respir Care. 2017;62:699 -717.

Dysart K, Miller TL, Wolfson MR, et al. Research in high flow therapy: mechanisms of action. Respir Med. 2009;103:1400 -1405.

Nishimura M. High-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy in adults: physiological benefits, indication, clinical benefits, and adverse effects. Respir Care. 2016;61:529 -541.

Parke RL, McGuinness SP. Pressures delivered by nasal high flow oxygen during all phases of the respiratory cycle. Respir Care. 2013;58:1621 -1624.

Rouadi P, Baroody FM, Abbott D, et al. A technique to measure the ability of the human nose to warm and humidify air. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1999;87:400 -406.

Spoletini G, Alotaibi M, Blasi F, et al. Heated humidified high-flow nasal oxygen in adults: mechanisms of action and clinical implications. Chest. 2015;148:253 -261.

Weiler T, Kamerkar A, Hotz J, et al. The relationship between high flow nasal cannula flow rate and effort of breathing in children. J Pediatr. 2017;189:66 -71.e3.

Hawkins S, Huston S, Campbell K, et al. High-flow, heated, humidified air via nasal cannula treats cpap-intolerant children with obstructive sleep apnea. J Clin Sleep Med. 2017;13:981 -989.

Goh CT, Kirby LJ, Schell DN, et al. Humidified high-flow nasal cannula oxygen in bronchiolitis reduces need for invasive ventilation but not intensive care admission. J Paediatr Child Health. 2017;53:897 -902.

Baudin F, Buisson A, Vanel B, et al. Nasal high flow in management of children with status asthmaticus: a retrospective observational study. Ann Intensive Care. 2017;7:55.

Coletti KD, Bagdure DN, Walker LK, et al. High-flow nasal cannula utilization in pediatric critical care. Respir Care. 2017;62:1023 -1029.

Corley A, Rickard CM, Aitken LM, et al. High-flow nasal cannulae for respiratory support in adult intensive care patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;5:CD010172.

Milési C, Essouri S, Pouyau R, et al. High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) versus nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) for the initial respiratory management of acute viral bronchiolitis in young infants: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (TRAMONTANE study). Intensive Care Med. 2017;43:209 -216.

Roberts CT, Owen LS, Manley BJ, et al. Nasal high-flow therapy for primary respiratory support in preterm infants. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1142 -1151.

Bell N, Hutchinson CL, Green TC, et al. Randomised control trial of humidified high flow nasal cannulae versus standard oxygen in the emergency department. Emerg Med Australas. 2015;27:537 -541.

Jones PG, Kamona S, Doran O, et al. Randomized controlled trial of humidified high-flow nasal oxygen for acute respiratory distress in the emergency department: the HOT-ER study. Respir Care. 2016;61:291 -299.

This RCT showed that HHHFNCT did not reduce the requirement for mechanical ventilation in ED compared to standard oxygen therapy in adults with acute respiratory distress

Makdee O, Monsomboon A, Surabenjawong U, et al. High-flow nasal cannula versus conventional oxygen therapy in emergency department patients with cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2017;70:465 -72 e2.

Franklin D, Babl FE, Schlapbach LJ, et al. A randomized trial of high-flow oxygen therapy in infants with bronchiolitis. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:1121 -1131.

·· First multicenter RCT in children outside the ICU environment demonstrating the benefits of HHHFNCT in bronchiolitis

Lee JH, Rehder KJ, Williford L, et al. Use of high flow nasal cannula in critically ill infants, children, and adults: a critical review of the literature. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39:247 -257.

Spence CJT, Buchmann NA, Jermy MC. Unsteady flow in the nasal cavity with high flow therapy measured by stereoscopic PIV. Exp Fluids. 2011;52:569 -579.

Frizzola M, Miller TL, Rodriguez ME, et al. High-flow nasal cannula: impact on oxygenation and ventilation in an acute lung injury model. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2011;46:67 -74.

Dassieu G, Brochard L, Agudze E, et al. Continuous tracheal gas insufflation enables a volume reduction strategy in hyaline membrane disease: technical aspects and clinical results. Intensive Care Med. 1998;24:1076 -1082.

Numa AH, Newth CJ. Anatomic dead space in infants and children. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1996;80:1485 -1489.

Bazuaye EA, Stone TN, Corris PA, et al. Variability of inspired oxygen concentration with nasal cannulas. Thorax. 1992;47:609 -611.

Markovitz GH, Colthurst J, Storer TW, et al. Effective inspired oxygen concentration measured via transtracheal and oral gas analysis. Respir Care. 2010;55:453 -459.

Wagstaff TA, Soni N. Performance of six types of oxygen delivery devices at varying respiratory rates. Anaesthesia. 2007;62:492 -503.

Anderson NJ, Cassidy PE, Janssen LL, et al. Peak inspiratory flows of adults exercising at light, moderate and heavy work loads. J Int Soc Respir Prot. 2006;23:53 -63.

Ritchie JE, Williams AB, Gerard C, et al. Evaluation of a humidified nasal high-flow oxygen system, using oxygraphy, capnography and measurement of upper airway pressures. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2011;39:1103 -1110.

Hasan RA, Habib RH. Effects of flow rate and airleak at the nares and mouth opening on positive distending pressure delivery using commercially available high-flow nasal cannula systems: a lung model study. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12:e29 -33.

Groves N, Tobin A. High flow nasal oxygen generates positive airway pressure in adult volunteers. Aust Crit Care. 2007;20:126 -131.

Parke R, McGuinness S, Eccleston M. Nasal high-flow therapy delivers low level positive airway pressure. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103:886 -890.

Corley A, Caruana LR, Barnett AG, et al. Oxygen delivery through high-flow nasal cannulae increase end-expiratory lung volume and reduce respiratory rate in post-cardiac surgical patients. Br J Anaesth. 2011;107:998 -1004.

Milesi C, Baleine J, Matecki S, et al. Is treatment with a high flow nasal cannula effective in acute viral bronchiolitis? A physiologic study. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39:1088 -1094.

Kubicka ZJ, Limauro J, Darnall RA. Heated, humidified high-flow nasal cannula therapy: yet another way to deliver continuous positive airway pressure?. Pediatrics. 2008;121:82 -88.

Dani C, Pratesi S, Migliori C, et al. High flow nasal cannula therapy as respiratory support in the preterm infant. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2009;44:629 -634.

Hinz J, Hahn G, Neumann P, et al. End-expiratory lung impedance change enables bedside monitoring of end-expiratory lung volume change. Intensive Care Med. 2003;29:37 -43.

Milesi C, Boubal M, Jacquot A, et al. High-flow nasal cannula: recommendations for daily practice in pediatrics. Ann Intensive Care. 2014;4:29.

Roca O, Hernandez G, Diaz-Lobato S, et al. Current evidence for the effectiveness of heated and humidified high flow nasal cannula supportive therapy in adult patients with respiratory failure. Crit Care. 2016;20:109.

Chidekel A, Zhu Y, Wang J, et al. The effects of gas humidification with high-flow nasal cannula on cultured human airway epithelial cells. Pulm Med. 2012;2012:380686.

Fontanari P, Burnet H, Zattara-Hartmann MC, et al. Changes in airway resistance induced by nasal inhalation of cold dry, dry, or moist air in normal individuals. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1996;81:1739 -1743.

Sztrymf B, Messika J, Bertrand F, et al. Beneficial effects of humidified high flow nasal oxygen in critical care patients: a prospective pilot study. Intensive Care Med. 2011;37:1780 -1786.

Roca O, Riera J, Torres F, et al. High-flow oxygen therapy in acute respiratory failure. Respir Care. 2010;55:408 -413.

[DOCLING_PAGE 8]

EXPERT REVIEW OF MEDICAL DEVICES

7

Spentzas T, Minarik M, Patters AB, et al. Children with respiratory distress treated with high-flow nasal cannula. J Intensive Care Med. 2009;24:323 -328.

Klingenberg C, Pettersen M, Hansen EA, et al. Patient comfort during treatment with heated humidified high flow nasal cannulae versus nasal continuous positive airway pressure: a randomised cross-over trial. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2014;99:F134 -7.

Manley BJ, Owen L, Doyle LW, et al. High-flow nasal cannulae and nasal continuous positive airway pressure use in non-tertiary special care nurseries in Australia and New Zealand. J Paediatr Child Health. 2012;48:16 -21.

Renda T, Corrado A, Iskandar G, et al. High-flow nasal oxygen therapy in intensive care and anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 2018;120:18 -27.

Frat JP, Thille AW, Mercat A, et al. High-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2185 -2196.

A multicenter RCT in adult ICU showing no significant difference in intubation rate among patients with non-hypercapnic acute hypoxemic respiratory failure managed with HHHFNCT, standard oxygen therapy or non-invasive ventilation

Sztrymf B, Messika J, Mayot T, et al. Impact of high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy on intensive care unit patients with acute respiratory failure: a prospective observational study. J Crit Care. 2012;27:324 e9 -13.

Carratala Perales JM, Llorens P, Brouzet B, et al. High-Flow therapy via nasal cannula in acute heart failure. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2011;64:723 -725.

Lenglet H, Sztrymf B, Leroy C, et al. Humidified high flow nasal oxygen during respiratory failure in the emergency department: feasibility and efficacy. Respir Care. 2012;57:1873 -1878.

Jeong JH, Kim DH, Kim SC, et al. Changes in arterial blood gases after use of high-flow nasal cannula therapy in the ED. Am J Emerg Med. 2015;33:1344 -1349.

Rittayamai N, Tscheikuna J, Praphruetkit N, et al. Use of high-flow nasal cannula for acute dyspnea and hypoxemia in the emergency department. Respir Care. 2015;60:1377 -1382.

Frat J-P, Coudroy R, Marjanovic N, et al. High-flow nasal oxygen therapy and noninvasive ventilation in the management of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. Ann Transl Med. 2017;5:297.

Esquinas AM, Martin C. High-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy in the emergency department: welcome, but selection should be the first step. Respir Care. 2013;58:e66 -7.

Ricard J-D. The authors respond to: high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy in the emergency department: welcome, but selection should be the first step. Respir Care. 2013;58:e67 -8.

Long E, Babl FE, Duke T. Is there a role for humidified heated high-flow nasal cannula therapy in paediatric emergency departments? Emerg Med J. 2016;33:386 -389.

Wing R, James C, Maranda LS, et al. Use of high-flow nasal cannula support in the emergency department reduces the need for intubation in pediatric acute respiratory insufficiency. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28:1117 -1123.

Milani GP, Plebani AM, Arturi E, et al. Using a high-flow nasal cannula provided superior results to low-flow oxygen delivery in moderate to severe bronchiolitis. Acta Paediatr. 2016;105:e368 -72.

Mayfield S, Bogossian F, O ' Malley L, et al. High-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy for infants with bronchiolitis: pilot study. J Paediatr Child Health. 2014;50:373 -378.

Chisti MJ, Salam MA, Smith JH, et al. Bubble continuous positive airway pressure for children with severe pneumonia and hypoxaemia in Bangladesh: an open, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;386:1057 -1065.

Schibler A, Franklin D. Respiratory support for children in the emergency department. J Paediatr Child Health. 2016;52:192 -196.

Kelly GS, Simon HK, Sturm JJ. High-flow nasal cannula use in children with respiratory distress in the emergency department: predicting the need for subsequent intubation. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2013;29:888 -892.

Ballestero Y, De Pedro J, Portillo N, et al. Pilot clinical trial of high-flow oxygen therapy in children with asthma in the emergency service. J Pediatr. 2018;194:204 -10 e3.

Kang BJ, Koh Y, Lim C-M, et al. Failure of high-flow nasal cannula therapy may delay intubation and increase mortality. Intensive Care Med. 2015;41:623 -632.

Ramnarayan P, Lister P, Dominguez T, et al. FIRST-line support for Assistance in Breathing in Children (FIRST-ABC): protocol for a multicentre randomised feasibility trial of non-invasive respiratory support in critically ill children. BMJ Open. 2017;7:e016181.

Eaton Turner E, Jenks M. Cost-effectiveness analysis of the use of high-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in intensive care units in NHS England. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2018;18:331 -337.

A cost-effective study looking at how HHHFNCT can be costsaving in ICU

Heikkilä P, Forma L, Korppi M. High-flow oxygen therapy is more cost-effective for bronchiolitis than standard treatment-A decision-tree analysis. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2016;51:1393 -1402.
