[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

Comment

harms of disruptions include symptoms of emotional disorders, behavioural disorders, and problems with inhibitory control. These serious sequelae are associated with substantial societal costs. 9 Frequent changes in caregivers has been implicated in the cause of indiscriminate social behaviour, in which children display poor social boundaries with unfamiliar adults, which is not uncommon among children being raised in group care settings. 7 Increasing numbers of disrupted attachment relationships are associated with increased risks of many types of psychopathology, in both the short and long term. 3-6 Conversely, reducing caregiving disruptions for young children in foster care has been shown to reduce the incidence of more problematic outcomes, such as psychiatric morbidity, disturbances of attachment, and cognitive development. 10 Although consequences might be especially deleterious in early childhood ( < 6 years), disruptions of attachment relationships throughout middle childhood (6 to < 12 years) are also associated with increased risk of serious psychiatric disorders. 5,6 These findings indicate that disruptions increase the risk of maladaptation and should be avoided whenever possible.

Based on the available evidence, the repeated experiences of establishing and disrupting attachments resulting from orphanage volunteering pose substantial and unnecessary risks of psychological harm, especially to young children. We, therefore, agree with Richter and Norman 1 that the practice of volunteer caregiving is incompatible with the wellbeing of children.

There are alternatives to becoming a temporary caregiver that might be rewarding to the volunteer and beneficial to children, families, and communities. Opportunities to improve the care and safety of children include volunteering in after-school centres to help children with homework, art activities, and sports, walking children to and from school to enhance their safety, playing and reading with hospitalised children, or volunteering in early child development centres. Many of these activities are under-resourced, and volunteers could make productive contributions without assuming transient primary caregiving roles.

We encourage volunteers and organisations to develop models of engagement that do not involve volunteers providing transient direct care to children in institutions and the consequent risks of long-term emotional and developmental harm.

*Charles H Zeanah, Nicole G Wilke, Carole Shauffer,

Tamsen Rochat, Amanda H Howard, Mary Dozier Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA (CZH); Christian Alliance for Orphans, Arequipa, Peru (NGW); Youth Law Center, San Francisco, CA, USA (CS); MRC Developmental Pathways to Health Research Unit, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa (TR); Department of Psychology, Samford University, Birmingham, AL, USA (AHH); Department of Psychology and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA (MD) czeanah@tulane.edu

CHZ reports grants from Lumos Foundation, outside of the submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.

1 Richter LM, Norman A. AIDS orphan tourism: a threat to young children in residential care. Vulnerable Child Youth Stud 2010; 5: 217-29.

2 Rotabi KS, Roby JL, McCreery Bunkers K. Altruistic exploitation: orphan tourism and global social work. Br J Soc Work 2016; 47: 648-65.

3 Lewis EE, Dozier M, Ackerman J, et al. The effect of placement instability on adopted children's inhibitory control abilities and oppositional behavior. Dev Psychol 2007; 6: 1415-27.

4 McGuire A, Cho B, Huffhines L, et al. The relation between dimensions of maltreatment, placement instability and mental health among youth in foster care. Child Abuse Negl 2018; 86 : 10-21.

5 Almas AN, Woodbury MR, Papp LJ, et al. The impact of caregiving disruptions experienced by previously institutionalized children on multiple outcomes in late childhood. Child Dev 2018; published online Oct 8. DOI:10.1111/cdev.13169.

6 Humphreys KL, Gleason MM, Drury SS, et al. Effects of institutional rearing and foster care on psychopathology at age 12 years in Romania: follow-up of an open, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2015; 2 : 625-34 .

7 Nelson CA, Fox NA, Zeanah CH. Romania's abandoned children: deprivation, brain development, and the struggle for recovery. Boston: Harvard University Press, 2014.

8 Stovall-McClough KC, Dozier M. Forming attachments in foster care: Infant attachment behaviors during the first 2 months of placement. Devel Psychopathol 2004; 16: 253-71.

9 Scott S, Knapp M, Henderson J, et al. Financial cost of social exclusion: follow-up of anti-social children into adulthood. BMJ ; 323: 191.

10 Pasalich DS, Fleming CB, Oxford ML, et al. Can parenting intervention prevent cascading effects from placement instability to insecure attachment to externalizing problems in maltreated toddlers? Child Maltreat 2016; 21: 175-85.

High flow nasal cannula-just expensive paracetamol?

Bronchiolitis is the leading cause of hospitalisation for children younger than 2 years, 1 motivating the ongoing effort to identify new therapies that might speed up recovery and reduce the time infants and families spend in the hospital. However, a familiar pattern in the development of new therapies for bronchiolitis For care and safety programmes see www.saferspaces.org.za/beinspired/entry/walking-businitiative, https://www. nelsonmandela childrenshospital.org/nmchvolunteer-program, and www.tree-ecd.co.za/volunteer Published Online July 17, 2019 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S2352-4642(19)30235-4

www.thelancet.com/child-adolescent Vol 3 September 2019

593

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

Comment

Burger/Phanie/Science Photo Library

has emerged. Novel interventions initially show promise and are readily adopted by medical providers, only for more definitive, high quality evidence to ultimately question their efficacy. As a result, with respect to therapeutic options, the American Academy of Pediatrics' bronchiolitis guideline consists of more don'ts than dos. 2 High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) is perhaps the latest therapy to show promise in treating bronchiolitis and undergo rapid adoption for this indication. Data from infants treated with HNFC in intensive care units (ICUs) showing decreased work of breathing 3,4 and decreased reliance on mechanical ventilation 5-7 inspired hope that initiating this therapy outside the ICU, on regular medical wards, might benefit children with bronchiolitis.

As hospitals increasingly adopt HFNC protocols that allow initiation of HFNC outside of the ICU setting, we find ourselves in a familiar place, asking whether the latest intervention for patients with bronchiolitis is actually effective. Answering that question requires consideration of which outcomes should be measured. The principal impetus for adopting protocols that allow HFNC use outside of the ICU is to offload the ICUthat is reduce the amount of time that patients with bronchiolitis spend in the ICU. Therefore, outcomes like ICU transfer rate, ICU length of stay, and total hospital length of stay are central considerations. From a patient and family perspective, outcomes like decreased work of breathing, improved sleep, and improved feeding are priorities. And of course, efforts should be made to ensure that HFNC can be used safely outside of the ICU, without contributing to increased adverse events or unrecognised clinical deterioration.

Studies have begun to assess these outcomes. Two randomised controlled trials (RCTs) 8,9 comparing lowflow with high-flow nasal cannula outside of the ICU found that patients randomly assigned to low-flow nasal cannula are frequently escalated to HFNC. For both RCTs, 8,9 escalation criteria were tied to work of breathing and these trial data further support the notion that HFNC decreases work of breathing. One of the RCTs 8 found that parents reported improved comfort, sleep, and feeding for children assigned to HFNC therapy. However, both trials found no difference in ICU burden outcomes, including rate of ICU transfer and ICU length of stay (as well as total hospital length of stay). Prepost observational study designs, comparing outcomes before and after a hospital has adopted a protocol allowing HFNC initiation outside of the ICU, similarly found no difference in outcomes related to ICU care. 10,11 From a safety standpoint, existing studies have not shown an increase in adverse events related to HFNC use outside of the ICU, including rates of subsequent mechanical ventilation, pneumothorax, cardiac arrest, or death. However, modest sample sizes and infrequency of these outcomes make them challenging to assess.

The expectation that allowing initiation of HFNC outside of the ICU for children with bronchiolitis would reduce ICU use is not supported by existing data. However, studies 3,4,8,9 have consistently found that HFNC makes children with bronchiolitis more comfortable, with demonstrable improvements in their work of breathing and perhaps their sleep and feeding. We should always be striving to make hospitalised children more comfortable, but the ultimate question is whether HFNC is the most efficient means to achieve this objective? The HFNC circuit has been estimated to cost 16 times that of conventional nasal cannula. 8 This figure does not include additional resource use that often accompanies HFNC, including expectations for increased assessments by nurses, physicians, or respiratory therapists. Surely there are less resource intensive options at our disposal for making patients with bronchiolitis more comfortable? Examples include encouraging early enteral feeding, reducing the depth or frequency of nasal suctioning, discontinuing unnecessary continuous monitoring and its tangle of wires, allowing parents to hold their child, or providing paracetamol.

A compelling argument for use of HFNC outside of the ICU will need to involve evidence that this method does something beyond making children appear more comfortable. To have power to detect differences in outcomes like ICU use or bronchiolitis-related adverse events, a sample size of at least a few thousand patients would be required. For example, in a trial of high-flow versus low-flow nasal cannula, 1209 patients would be required in each group to detect a 3% absolute decrease (with 80% power) in the proportion of patients transferred to the ICU, assuming a transfer proportion of 9% in the low-flow nasal cannula group and a two-sided alpha of 0·05 (effect size and control transfer proportion estimates from Franklin et al 9 ). Given the sample size requirements and the challenge of blinding medical providers and parents to low-flow and high-flow nasal cannula devices, the ideal study design is probably a cluster RCT that compares outcomes between hospitals randomly assigned to either implementation of HFNC protocols outside of the ICU or restriction of its use to the ICU. To date, such a trial has not been published, nor have any been registered (table). In the absence of a multicentre study showing that HFNC initiation outside of the ICU reduces ICU use or protects children from subsequent adverse events, HFNC might have to join its predecessors as a once promising intervention for bronchiolitis that did not live up to expectations.

594

www.thelancet.com/child-adolescent Vol 3 September 2019

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

Comment

*Eric R Coon, Vineeta Mittal, Patrick W Brady

Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Primary Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City, UT 84113, USA (ERC); Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA (VM); Department of Pediatrics, Children's Medical Center Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA (VM); and Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA (PWB)

eric.coon@hsc.utah.edu

PWB reports grants from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, outside the submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.

1 Hasegawa K, Tsugawa Y, Brown DF, Mansbach JM, Camargo CA Jr. Trends in bronchiolitis hospitalizations in the United States, 2000-2009. Pediatrics 2013; 132: 28-36.

2 Ralston SL, Lieberthal AS, Meissner HC, et al. Clinical practice guideline: the diagnosis, management, and prevention of bronchiolitis. Pediatrics 2014; 134: e1474-1502.

3 Hough JL, Pham TM, Schibler A. Physiologic effect of high-flow nasal cannula in infants with bronchiolitis. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2014; 15: e214-19.

4 Pham TM, O'Malley L, Mayfield S, Martin S, Schibler A. The effect of high flow nasal cannula therapy on the work of breathing in infants with bronchiolitis. Pediatr Pulmonol 2015; 50: 713-20.

5 McKiernan C, Chua LC, Visintainer PF, Allen H. High flow nasal cannulae therapy in infants with bronchiolitis. J Pediatr 2010; 156: 634-38.

6 Schibler A, Pham TM, Dunster KR, et al. Reduced intubation rates for infants after introduction of high-flow nasal prong oxygen delivery. Intensive Care Med 2011; 37: 847-52.

7 Schlapbach LJ, Straney L, Gelbart B, et al. Burden of disease and change in practice in critically ill infants with bronchiolitis. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1601648.

8 Kepreotes E, Whitehead B, Attia J, et al. High-flow warm humidified oxygen versus standard low-flow nasal cannula oxygen for moderate bronchiolitis (HFWHO RCT): an open, phase 4, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 930-39.

9 Franklin D, Babl FE, Schlapbach LJ, et al. A randomized trial of high-flow oxygen therapy in infants with bronchiolitis. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 1121-31.

10 Riese J, Porter T, Fierce J, Riese A, Richardson T, Alverson BK. Clinical outcomes of bronchiolitis after implementation of a general ward high flow nasal cannula guideline. Hosp Pediatr 2017; 7: 197-203.

11 Mace AO, Gibbons J, Schultz A, Knight G, Martin AC. Humidified high-flow nasal cannula oxygen for bronchiolitis: should we go with the flow? Arch Dis Child 2018; 103: 303.

FDA approval of GLP-1 receptor agonist (liraglutide) for use in children

The incidence of type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents aged 10-19 years increased in the 2002-12 period, 1 and the burden of the disease is projected to continue to increase over the next 30 years. Until July, 2019, the approved pharmaceutical options for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents were limited to metformin and insulin. However, these therapies have proved to be less effective in children and adolescents than in adults with the disease. 2,3 The recent US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of liraglutide 4 for use in paediatric type 2 diabetes begins to address an unmet need in paediatric diabetes therapy.

Some of the differences between adult-onset and childhood-onset type 2 diabetes stem from differences in pathophysiology, progression, and response to therapeutic agents in children and adolescents versus adults. Adolescents with obesity who develop type 2 diabetes have severe impairment in peripheral and hepatic insulin sensitivity, with about 50% lower peripheral insulin sensitivity than peers with obesity but without diabetes, along with increased endogenous glucose production, inadequate first-phase and second-phase insulin production and secretion. 5 When compared with adults with prediabetes or early type 2 diabetes of similar adiposity and haemoglobin A 1c (HbA 1c ) levels, children and adolescents are more severely insulin resistant. 6 Once diagnosed with diabetes, the deterioration in β-cell function is also more rapid in child cohorts than in adult cohorts. 7 These factors are probably contributing to the early onset and the difficulty in the management of diabetes in children and adolescents.

The challenges in the management of type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents became evident in multicentre studies, particularly the Treatment Options For Type 2 Diabetes In Youth (TODAY) study, 2 in registry studies, 3 and more recently in the Restoring Insulin Secretion (RISE) study 8 comparing early intervention with metformin and insulin or insulin Ian Hooton/Science Photo Library

Published Online July 22, 2019 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S2352-4642(19)30236-6

www.thelancet.com/child-adolescent Vol 3 September 2019

595
