[DOCLING_PAGE 1]

J A C C : C A R D I O V A S C U L A R I N T E R V E N T I O N S ª 2 0 2 4 B Y T H E AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R

VOL. 1 7 , NO. 1 0 , 2 0 2 4

EDITORIAL COMMENT

Feast or Famine

Is it Time to Retire the Nothing by Mouth Order?*

Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD

I n 1959, Mason Sones performed the fi rst coronary angiogram, 1 which opened the doors to a new era in cardiology. Diagnostic angiography and percutaneous coronary interventions (PCIs) became standard armamentarium to manage patients with angina and acute coronary syndromes. In the early days, angiograms were not without risk, with death, myocardial infarction, and ventricular fi brillation occurring in 1.8%, 2.5%, and 12% of cases. 2 Because of the hypertonicity of the early contrast agents used, heart block, 3 nausea, and vomiting were commonly reported. With the advent of PCI, emergency surgery for abrupt vessel closure was reported in approximately 8% of cases. 4 Taking into consideration the potential for serious complications that may lead to endotracheal intubation and emergency surgery, it is no wonder that physicians instructed patients to take nothing by mouth (NPO) for up to 12 hours before procedures to mitigate the risk of aspiration pneumonia or other such sequelae. Over time, advances in techniques and evolving technologies substantially improved procedural safety, and complications associated with coronary angiography and PCI were greatly reduced. 5 Despite improved procedural safety, the order for NPO remains in effect in most cardiac catheterization laboratories in the United States and across the world, and societies continue to encourage fasting before coronary procedures. 6,7

*Editorials published in JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions re fl ect the views of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions or the American College of Cardiology.

From the Cleveland Clinic, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The author attests they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the author ' s institution and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the Author Center.

In this issue of JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions , Boukantar et al 8 reported the results of the TONIC (A randomized controlled Trial Of Non-fasting versus fasting before Interventional Coronary procedures) trial, a single-center, single-blinded, randomized controlled noninferiority trial to evaluate the safety of permissive feeding before coronary procedures. They randomized 739 patients referred for coronary angiography or PCI (30% received ad hoc or planned PCI) to a strategy of nonfasting vs NPO for 6 hours. Despite longer mean fasting times in the standard group, approximately 20% of patients in the nonfasting group were NPO $ 6 hours. A strategy of nonfasting was found to be noninferior to fasting for the composite primary outcome of vasovagal syncope, hypoglycemia, and isolated nausea and/or vomiting. One patient in each group developed aspiration pneumonia (de fi ned as fever, dyspnea, and/or cough), although the study was not powered for this endpoint. Importantly, a smaller proportion of patients in the nonfasting group reported hunger or thirst, but procedural satisfaction was similar between the groups.

The results of this study are consistent with earlier observational reports and a smaller randomized trial 9,10 and provide reassuring information to physicians and cardiac catheterization laboratory teams. Because a strategy of permissive oral intake before coronary angiography or PCI is safe and is associated with less perception of thirst or hunger, it is logical to consider elimination of the NPO order from the precatheterization care protocols for the majority of referred patients. However, before revising these order sets, one must identify the population of patients that is best served by a liberal allowance for oral intake before cardiac catheterization procedures and, conversely, those who might be harmed by this strategy, whereby maintenance of NPO orders may be warranted. The former situation includes patients undergoing elective procedures with characteristics that most closely re fl ect the features of patients enrolled in the TONIC trial. One might expect particular bene fi t from the removal of the NPO order in patients undergoing procedures later in the day when fasting times can be quite prolonged. However, keeping the order in patients at greatest risk for aspiration pneumonia caused by circumstances that may lead to endotracheal intubation or transition to general anesthesia is prudent. To better de fi ne this group, we must re-examine the selection criteria and baseline demographics of subjects enrolled in the TONIC trial.

ISSN 1936-8798/$36.00

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2024.04.027

[DOCLING_PAGE 2]

1212

Tamis-Holland

Revisiting the NPO Before Catheterization Order

J A C C : C A R D I O V A S C U L A R I N T E R V E N T I O N S V O L . 1 7 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 4 MAY 27, 2 0 2 4 : 1 2 1 1 -1 2 1 3

The TONIC trial excluded patients with hemodynamic instability and those undergoing noncoronary catheterization procedures; few cases (8%) were performed using femoral artery access, which is associated with a longer time in the recumbent position (particularly when large-bore access is used). These situations may pose a higher risk for aspiration, transition to general anesthesia, or the development of respiratory failure. Furthermore, only 15% of patients enrolled in the TONIC trial had NYHA functional class III or IV heart failure. Because heart failure patients are at higher risk of developing respiratory failure or requiring bilevel positive airway pressure support, a thorough assessment may be needed in these patients before permitting liberal oral intake. Finally, it is interesting to note that the mean body mass index of the enrolled patients in the TONIC trial was 27 kg/m 2 , which is notably lower than the mean body mass index of 30 kg/m 2 in patients undergoing PCI in the United States. 11 Obese patients are at greater risk for sleep apnea, which can complicate catheterization procedures, particularly when conscious sedation is administered. In the TONIC trial, only 7% of patients had sleep apnea requiring a device, and for this reason, it is dif fi cult to extrapolate the fi ndings from this trial to the patients at large who suffer from sleep apnea.

When the risk of aspiration is not high, elimination of the NPO order may be safe, and the primary focus is on patient comfort. Although the patients in the TONIC trial randomized to nonfasting reported less frequent thirst and hunger, some patients may experience untoward events from liberal oral intake because of delayed gastric emptying, which might lead to abdominal fullness and increased nausea or vomiting. Gastroparesis resulting in delayed gastric emptying is found in 10% of patients with diabetes. 12 Although subgroup analysis did not demonstrate an interaction between the presence of diabetes and clinical events by treatment arm, one should be cognizant of the potential risk of such events, particularly for those patients with signs and/or symptoms of gastric motility disorders or those treated with medications that may further delay gastric emptying. In these cases, restricting oral intake may lead to less nausea and vomiting and greater procedural comfort. It is interesting to note that roughly 20% of patients in the nonfasting group chose to fast before their procedure, thus demonstrating the variability in patient preference for remaining NPO before catheterization.

An important factor that may limit extrapolation of the fi ndings of this trial into our daily practice relates to the need for conscious sedation. In the TONIC trial, only 21% of the enrolled patients received conscious sedation. Although subgroup analyses showed a consistent effect of nonfasting regardless of the need for conscious sedation, current recommendations from the American Society of Anesthesiology encourage fasting before procedures 13 when conscious sedation is administered. The TONIC trial presents compelling evidence to support revision of these guidelines, but until such changes are made, current recommendations may dictate practice patterns of physicians working in the United States.

Lastly, beyond patient experience, eliminating the NPO order may result in fewer procedural cancellations and additional opportunities to add patients to the schedule as time permits, thus improving catheterization laboratory ef fi ciency and fl ow. Whether this will have a meaningful impact on catheterization laboratory volume or costs will need to be determined.

It is time to revisit the NPO order in our catheterization laboratory. Liberalizing oral intake for most of our coronary cases will likely improve patient experience without affecting safety. This is easily accomplished through careful patient selection. Those with severe heart failure, hemodynamic instability, morbid obesity, signi fi cant sleep apnea, and symptomatic gastric motility disorders may benefi t from fasting before coronary procedures. However, for most patients, we must break fast!

FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES

The author has reported that she has no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, Cleveland Clinic, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute, 9500 Euclid Avenue, J2-208, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. E-mail: tamisj@ccf.org.

[DOCLING_PAGE 3]

J A C C : C A R D I O V A S C U L A R I N T E R V E N T I O N S V O L . 1 7 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 4 MAY 27, 2 0 2 4 : 1 2 1 1 -1 2 1 3

Tamis-Holland

Revisiting the NPO Before Catheterization Order

1213

REFERENCES

Sones F. Coronary arteriography read before the Eighth Annual Convention of the American College of Cardiology. 1959; Philadelphia, PA.

Adams DF, Fraser D, Abrams HL. Hazards of coronary arteriography. Semin Roentgenol . 1972;7(4):357 -368.

Banks DC, Raftery EB, Oram S. Evaluation of contrast media used in man for coronary arteriography. Br Heart J . 1970;32(3):317 -319.

Gruentzig AR, King SB 3rd, Schlumpf M, Siegenthaler W. Long-term follow-up after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. The early Zurich experience. N Engl J Med . 1987;316(18):1127 -1132.

Al-Hijji MA, Lennon RJ, Gulati R, et al. Safety and risk of major complications with diagnostic cardiac catheterization. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2019;12(7):e007791.

Naidu SS, Abbott JD, Bagai J, et al. SCAI expert consensus update on best practices in the cardiac

catheterization laboratory. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2021;98(2):255 -276.

Bangalore S, Barsness GW, Dangas GD, et al. Evidence-based practices in the cardiac catheterization laboratory: a scienti fi c statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;144(5):e107 -e119.

Boukantar, Chiaroni P-M, Gallet R, et al. A Randomized Controlled Trial of Nonfasting vs Fasting Before Interventional Coronary Procedures: the TONIC trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2024;17(10):1200 -1210.

Woods C, Wood M, Boylan A, Flanagan ME, Powers J. Fasting versus a heart-healthy diet before cardiac catheterization: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Crit Care . 2024;33(1):29 -33.

Kimpton TL, Ward K. Is not fasting before cardiac catheterisation better than fasting? A systematic integrative literature review. N Z Med J . 2021;134(1547):102 -113.

Castro-Dominguez YS, et al. Predicting inhospital mortality in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78(3):216 -229.

Almogbel RA, Alhussan FA, Alnasser SA, Algeffari MA. Prevalence and risk factors of gastroparesis-related symptoms among patients with type 2 diabetes. Int J Health Sci (Qassim) . 2016;10(3):397 -404.

Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative Fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anesthesiology . 2017;126(3):376 -393.

KEY WORDS cardiac catheterization, complications, fasting, NPO
